1
On the Synergies between Machine Learning
and Binocular Stereo for Depth Estimation from
Images: a Survey
Matteo Poggi, Member, IEEE, Fabio Tosi, Student Member, IEEE,
Konstantinos Batsos, Student Member, IEEE,
Philippos Mordohai, Member, IEEE, and Stefano Mattoccia, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Stereo matching is one of the longest-standing problems in computer vision with close to 40 years of studies and research.
Throughout the years the paradigm has shifted from local, pixel-level decision to various forms of discrete and continuous optimization
to data-driven, learning-based methods. Recently, the rise of machine learning and the rapid proliferation of deep learning enhanced
stereo matching with new exciting trends and applications unthinkable until a few years ago. Interestingly, the relationship between
these two worlds is two-way. While machine, and especially deep, learning advanced the state-of-the-art in stereo matching, stereo
itself enabled new ground-breaking methodologies such as self-supervised monocular depth estimation based on deep networks. In
this paper, we review recent research in the ﬁeld of learning-based depth estimation from single and binocular images highlighting the
synergies, the successes achieved so far and the open challenges the community is going to face in the immediate future.
Index Terms—Stereo matching, machine learning, deep learning, monocular depth estimation
!
1
INTRODUCTION
Since the early stages of computer vision, estimating depth
from images has been one of the iconic challenges for
researchers. Obtaining dense and accurate depth maps is
crucial for effectively addressing higher-level tasks such as
3D reconstruction, mapping and localization, autonomous
driving, and many more. The focus of this paper is on
stereo matching, which is classiﬁed as a passive sensing
technique, and related topics. Competing technologies for
depth estimation rely on active sensing which comes in
several forms, including structured light projection, Time-
Of-Flight (ToF) measurement, Laser Imaging Detection and
Ranging (LIDAR) among others. Common to these devices
is the perturbation of the environment required to sense
depth. Although very accurate and precise, these sensors
suffer from non-negligible weaknesses limiting their prac-
tical deployment for real applications. For instance, LIDAR
sensors, which rely on one or more laser emitters scanning
the environment through mechanical rotation, may suffer
from misalignment, missing laser returns due to absorbing
or reﬂective surfaces and multi-pathing. Moreover, they
typically provide only sparse measurements of the observed
scene, with density (and pricing) increasing with the num-
•
M. Poggi, F. Tosi and S. Mattoccia are with the Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, University of Bologna, Italy, IT.
{m.poggi,fabio.tosi5,stefano.mattoccia} @unibo.it
•
K. Batsos is with Argo AI.
kbatsos@stevens.edu
•
P. Mordohai is with the Department of Computer Science, Stevens Insti-
tute of Technology, New Jersey, USA.
philippos.mordohai@stevens.edu
ber of laser emitters. For structured-light devices, such
as the Microsoft Kinect, the pattern projection technology
constrains the working range to a few meters and prevents
usage under direct sunlight.
Inferring depth from images acquired by a regular cam-
era has the potential to overcome all the limitations above.
Among the different techniques for this purpose, stereo
matching [1] takes as input two rectiﬁed images and
at-
tempts to compute the disparity of every pixel by match-
ing corresponding pixels along conjugate epipolar lines,
thus enabling depth estimation via triangulation. Years of
research proved the effectiveness of stereo, making it a
viable alternative to expensive active sensors often deployed
in practical applications. The success and proliferation of
machine learning and deep learning techniques in computer
vision [2] led to notable improvements to stereo matching,
even though it was one of the areas of computer vision in
which learning was adopted relatively late. At the same
time, the most recent advances in depth estimation from
images have demonstrated that deep learning itself could
beneﬁt from stereo to achieve goals unimaginable just a
few years ago, as in the case of self-supervised single-
image depth estimation enabled through view synthesis [3]
or other stereo-based strategies. Thus, the synergy between
these two worlds led to outstanding results, shown in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we present a comprehensive review of
the last years of progress in the ﬁeld of depth estimation
via binocular stereo matching and related topics. Starting
from early attempts to leverage machine learning to replace
single steps of the traditional stereo pipeline [1], we will
guide the reader through ﬁve years of research, highlighting
the successes achieved so far and pointing out the open
challenges the community is going to face in the immediate
arXiv:2004.08566v2  [cs.CV]  31 Mar 2021

2
a)
b)
Fig. 1. Years of progress in the ﬁeld of stereo vision and machine learning enable the estimation of depth maps of unprecedented quality from
a) stereo or b) monocular images.
future. This paper extends the topics covered by Learning-
based depth estimation from stereo and monocular images: suc-
cesses, limitations and future challenges tutorials offered at 3DV
20181 and CVPR 20192. We argue that it is timely since the
previous surveys on stereo [1], [4] are outdated.
The rest of the manuscript is organized as follows: Sec-
tion 2 introduces the most popular datasets and benchmarks
in stereo matching, Section 3 discusses early attempts to
replace individual steps of conventional stereo pipelines [1]
with learning-based techniques, followed by Section 4 that
reviews and classiﬁes end-to-end models for stereo match-
ing. Then, we consider two aspects concerning respectively
the conventional pipelines and the end-to-end models, that
are conﬁdence estimation, covered in Section 5, and the
domain-shift problem, introduced in Section 6 together with
techniques aimed at mitigating it. Then, Section 7 reviews
single-image depth estimation frameworks supervised by
means of stereo images and ﬁnally, Section 8 collects take-
home messages from our survey.
2
DATASETS
In most computer vision problems, the availability of large
and diverse datasets is of paramount importance for suc-
cessfully developing new algorithms and for being able to
measure their effectiveness. For years, researchers in stereo
matching evaluated their proposals on a few dozen stereo
pairs with ground truth depth maps acquired in controlled,
indoor environments [1], [5], [6]. Although these datasets
allowed notable progress in the design of stereo algorithms,
they did not adequately highlight many of the challenges
arising in real applications. Moreover, modern machine
learning algorithms are data-hungry and require much more
than a few dozen stereo pairs.
In 2012, the ﬁrst large-scale dataset with images of
outdoor, real environments was released [7] and an indoor
dataset with much higher resolution [8] appeared soon after.
Later, with the advent of deep learning [2] these datasets
were followed by large, synthetic image sets which are ideal
for training deep networks thanks to the negligible cost
required to generate a multitude of training samples. In
all cases, the datasets provide depth annotations obtained
through different methodologies discussed later. The rest of
this section will introduce in detail each of these datasets,
summarized in Fig. 2 where we show one reference image
and the associated ground truth disparity map for each of
them, respectively for a) KITTI 2015, b) Middlebury 2014,
c) ETH3D and d) Freiburg SceneFlow. The ﬁrst three were
the foundation of the stereo aspect of the Robust Vision
Challenge (ROB)3 in 2018.
1. sites.google.com/view/3dv-2018-depth-from-image
2. sites.google.com/view/cvpr-2019-depth-from-image
3. robustvision.net
Fig. 2. Overview of the most popular stereo datasets in literature,
with examples of reference images and associated ground truth dispar-
ity. a) KITTI 2015 [9], b) Middlebury 2014 [8], c) ETH3D [10], d) Freiburg
SceneFlow [11].
2.1
KITTI
Acquired by Geiger et al. [12], the KITTI Vision Benchmark
Suite represents the ﬁrst, large-scale collection of images
from a driving environment. The KITTI benchmarks have
been seminal to the development of several algorithms and
methods supporting autonomous driving. The data have
been acquired from a car equipped with two stereo camera
pairs, one grayscale and one color, a Velodyne LIDAR, GPS
and inertial sensors. It consists of about 42k stereo pairs and
LIDAR point clouds taken from 61 different scenes. From
this extensive collection of images, appropriate benchmarks
are available for key computer vision tasks such as stereo,
optical ﬂow, visual odometry, object detection and more.
Two main datasets are available for stereo matching: KITTI
2012 and KITTI 2015.
KITTI 2012 [7].
This is the ﬁrst dataset for stereo
matching comprising outdoor images of static scenes and
providing an online benchmark4 for evaluation. It consists
of 389 grayscale stereo pairs (recently made available in
color format as well), split into 194 training pairs with avail-
able ground truth and 195 test pairs with withheld ground
truth. Ground truth depth was obtained from LIDAR mea-
surements as follows. A set of consecutive frames (5 before
and 5 after) were registered using ICP, accumulated point
clouds were re-projected onto the image, and ﬁnally, all
ambiguous image regions such as windows and fences
were manually removed. Using calibration parameters, the
3D points were projected on the images to obtain depth
measurements, which were converted into disparities. This
strategy yields semi-dense ground truth maps, covering
about one third of the pixels in each input image. The error
metrics on the benchmark are the percentage of pixels with
a disparity error greater than 3 and the average disparity
error, measured either on all pixels or non-occluded pixels
only. In both cases, the lower the better. Metrics computed
in reﬂective regions are also available.
4. cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval stereo ﬂow.php?benchmark=stereo

3
KITTI 2015 [9]. A few years later, an improved dataset
and benchmark for scene ﬂow estimation [9] was proposed.
In this case, the dataset consists of 400 color stereo pairs,
evenly split into training and test sets. In contrast to the
previous dataset, the stereo pairs are from dynamic scenes
with objects (mostly cars) moving independently. The same
procedure used for KITTI 2012 is followed here to obtain
ground truth labels, except for moving objects whose 3D
points cannot be properly accumulated over time. Hence,
to obtain depth annotations for cars, 3D cad models are
ﬁtted into accumulated point clouds and re-projected onto
the image. As the primary evaluation metric, the percentage
of pixels with an absolute disparity error greater than 3 and
a relative error larger than 5% (D1) is reported on the online
benchmark5, the lower the better. The D1 metric is listed for
foreground (i.e. belonging to moving objects), background
or all pixels. Moreover, masks to distinguish between non-
occluded and all pixels are available.
2.2
Middlebury
The Middlebury Stereo Vision Page provided the ﬁrst
benchmark that allowed authors to submit the results of
their algorithms. Over the years, the Middlebury stereo
datasets have provided indoor images with dense ground
truth labels, obtained by manual annotation at ﬁrst [1] and
by structured light sensors later [5], [6], [8]. Three main
versions have been proposed between 2002 [1] and 2014 [8],
with varying resolution and image content. We will focus on
this latter version, namely Middlebury 2014, since it provides
an online benchmark for evaluation and still represents one
of the most challenging datasets for stereo matching.
Middlebury 2014 [8]. It consists of 33 scenes, divided
into training, additional and test splits made of respectively
13, 10 and 10 stereo pairs. Some of the data are used
multiple times under different exposure and illumination
conditions. A unique feature of this dataset is the very high
image resolution, which reaches 6 megapixels compared
to 0.3 megapixels of the KITTI images, and a disparity
range between 200 and 800 pixels, representing one of the
hardest challenges of this dataset. Images and ground truth
disparity maps are provided at full (F), half (H) and quarter
(Q) resolution. An active stereo pipeline, described in detail
in [8], was deployed to obtain dense and accurate ground
truth depth. The limited number of training samples and
the variety of content in the images make this dataset partic-
ularly challenging for deep learning methods, in particular
for end-to-end models as we will set in the next sections.
The online benchmark6, reports the percentage of pixels
having disparity errors larger than 0.5, 1, 2 and 4, as well
as average and root mean square errors (RMSE) and other
metrics on either all or non-occluded pixels.
2.3
ETH3D
ETH3D [10] is a recent, real-world, multi-view dataset for
3D reconstruction acquired in both indoor and outdoor en-
vironments at ETH Zurich. It consists of 25 high-resolution
color multi-view stereo scenes divided into 13 for training
5. cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/eval scene ﬂow.php?benchmark=stereo
6. vision.middlebury.edu/stereo/eval3
and 12 for testing, 10 low-resolution grayscale many-view
videos evenly divided for training and testing and ﬁnally
47 low-resolution grayscale stereo pairs, respectively split
into 27 and 20 for training and testing. To obtain ground
truth disparities, the authors recorded the scene geometry
with a Faro Focus X 330 laser scanner, taking one or more
360◦scans with up to 28 million points each. Together with
depth, the color of each 3D point captured by the laser scan-
ner’s integrated RGB camera was acquired, taking about 9
minutes to collect a single scan.
The online benchmark7,
reports similar metrics to those of the Middlebury 2014
dataset.
2.4
Freiburg SceneFlow
The Freiburg SceneFlow dataset [11], [13] was a ground-
breaking step forward in the ﬁeld. As evidence, we un-
derline that most of the proposed end-to-end networks
for stereo matching are trained from scratch on this large
dataset, before being ﬁne-tuned on real data. The dataset
consists of 3D scenes, from which images and dense ground
truth for stereo, optical ﬂow, and scene ﬂow are rendered.
To this end, the authors modiﬁed the internal rendering
engine of the freely available Blender suite in order to
produce fully dense and accurate ground truth for the
two views of a virtual stereo camera with a resolution of
540×960 pixels. The dataset is organized into three subsets,
named FlyingThings3D, Monkaa and Driving, totalling about
39000 stereo pairs overall. We brieﬂy summarize the three
datasets, referring the reader to [13] for more details.
FlyingThings3D. This set of images has been obtained
fully automatically: the authors created a structured back-
ground from random geometric shapes, and overlayed on
it dynamic foreground objects sampled from ShapeNet [14]
and following linear trajectories in 3D space, as the camera
itself does. It totals 22872 stereo pairs, while 4370 more are
set aside as the validation set of the full SceneFlow dataset.
Monkaa. In contrast to FlyingThings3D, stereo pairs con-
tained in this split are generated from an animated movie in
a deterministic way. 3D artists modeled original scenes and
elements, then the authors produced custom environments
and rendered long scenes to sample sufﬁcient data. This
subset contains 8591 stereo pairs.
Driving. Similarly to Monkaa, this split has been gen-
erated in a deterministic way as well. The aim of this
portion of the Freiburg dataset is to provide data relevant
to driving environments, as opposed to general scenes. This
set contains 4392 samples.
2.5
Other datasets
We mention a few more datasets which have been used less
widely with respect to the previous ones.
MPI-Sintel [15]. Originally proposed for dense optical
ﬂow benchmarking, the Sintel dataset is a collection of
synthetic images extracted from short, animated movies.
Together with dense ﬂow labels, it recently has made
available stereo pairs, disparity and occlusion ground truth
annotations for 23 scenes with a total of 1109 stereo pairs.
However, this dataset has rarely been used in the evaluation
7. eth3d.net/low res two view

4
of stereo approaches [16], [17]; it is much more popular in
optical ﬂow.
CARLA [18]. This framework implements a simulator
allowing for data generation in the context of autonomous
driving. It provides open-source code and digital assets (e.g.
urban layouts, buildings, vehicles), allowing for synthesis
of virtual environments in varying weather conditions and
with full control of static and dynamic actors in the scene.
Agents with custom sensors, such as a stereo camera, can
navigate in the simulated world and acquire a potentially
unlimited amount of images with dense annotations. Al-
though rarely used to train stereo networks [19], the afore-
mentioned modelling power makes it a promising tool for
future research.
More driving datasets. We conclude listing newly-
proposed imagery acquired in driving environments. The
Oxford Robotcar dataset [20] has been acquired after more
than 100 km navigation with a trinocular camera, thus
collecting stereo pairs with both a narrow and a wide
baseline. Ground truth depth is generated from raw LIDAR
measurements. Apolloscape [21] provides 5165 stereo pairs
at 3 megapixels resolution, divided into 4156 pairs for train-
ing and 1009 for testing, with dense ground truth obtained
by point cloud accumulation and ﬁtting 3D CAD models,
similarly to KITTI 2015. The recent DrivingStereo dataset
[22] provides over 180k stereo pairs at 1.4 megapixels res-
olution, with semi-dense ground truth disparities obtained
by interpolating LIDAR measurements and reﬁning them
with a deep stereo network. Potentially relevant are very
large datasets released to support research on autonomous
driving. Speciﬁcally, the Waymo Open Dataset [23], Argov-
erse by Argo AI [24] and the Lyft Level 5 dataset [25] are of
unprecedented scale and one could imagine rectiﬁed stereo
pairs with ground truth being extracted from them. We an-
ticipate that Apolloscape and DrivingStereo, which provide
binocular stereo imagery directly, will play a signiﬁcant role
for future developments in stereo matching.
3
LEARNING WITHIN THE STEREO PIPELINE
Despite the proliferation and success of deep learning [2] in
most high-level tasks in computer vision, low-level vision
problems were only partially affected at the very beginning.
The initial research efforts applying machine learning in
stereo vision aimed at improving individual steps of the
established pipeline [1], for instance by learning a matching
cost function to replace hand-crafted ones based on SAD or
the census transform [28] or by learning how to improve
the subsequent optimization and reﬁnement stages after the
conventional winner-takes-all (WTA) strategy. This ﬁrst step
ignited the rapid evolution of stereo algorithms of the last
ﬁve years, progressively developing more robust methods
as shown in Fig. 3.
3.1
Matching cost
Since stereo matching aims to detect correspondences be-
tween pixels, intuitively learning a robust matching function
is a promising ﬁrst step. Better matching costs also allow
for improved volume optimization and thus lead to more
accurate disparity maps. Critical for this kind of approaches
is the possibility of extracting large amounts of training
data from a few hundred images. Since the goal is learning
correspondences between pixels, each pixel with available
ground truth represents a training sample. This means that
a relatively small dataset, such as KITTI 2015, provides more
than 30 million samples, even though only 30% of the total
pixels are labelled.
MC-CNN [27]. The most impactful work in this area is
by ˇZbontar and LeCun who train a CNN to predict whether
two image patches match or not. A Siamese network ex-
tracts features from the two images, which are passed to a
fully connected network estimating a matching score for the
center pixel of the left patch. By replacing fully connected
layers with 1×1 convolutions, the architecture can be made
fully convolutional to process the entire image at once.
Two versions were developed: MC-CNN-acrt for which the
features are concatenated, thus D forwards are required at
test time (where D is the disparity range) and MC-CNN-fst
which replaces concatenation with a dot product, allowing
for a single forward pass through the network at the cost
of a small drop in accuracy. In order to achieve state-of-
the-art results, the cost volume obtained by MC-CNN is
optimized and reﬁned using a conventional SGM pipeline
[29] including Cross Based Cross Aggregation (CBCA) [30].
Deep Embed [31]. In conventional pipelines, the choice
of window size is crucial to the effectiveness of local ag-
gregation. In particular, large windows allow for processing
more information and are more robust to textureless regions,
but produce blurred boundaries near depth discontinuities.
Conversely, small windows are preferred near edges but are
ineffective in ambiguous regions. Following this observa-
tion, Chen et al. design a network to learn a multi-scale
feature embedding, processing 13 × 13 patches at full and
half resolution, thus learning a cost function from both small
and large windows. Final matching scores are obtained as
the dot product between left and right multi-scale features,
extracted by a Siamese feature extractor.
Content CNN [32]. The aforementioned approaches pro-
cess patches separately, producing a score for each patch
comparison that is independent of other comparisons. Luo
et al. pose the problem as multi-class classiﬁcation, where
the classes are all possible disparities, instead of binary clas-
siﬁcation for each disparity. This leads to calibrated scores
for each disparity and higher accuracy. The dot product, as
in MC-CNN-fst, is used to combine left and right features.
Per-pixel pyramid-pooling [33]. Park and Lee enable the
network to access wider context by adding a pyramid pool-
ing layer that considers data over multiple scales without
loss of resolution and detail. This leads to disparity maps
with precise discontinuities and higher accuracy than MC-
CNN-acrt, especially when avoiding SGM optimization.
SDC [34]. Schuster et al. propose a novel architecture
for learning an universal descriptor for dense matching.
By leveraging parallel dilated convolutions, with different
dilation factors, SDC extracts features by processing a large
receptive ﬁeld with moderate increase of the computational
cost. This solution is effective at improving performance
of stereo, optical ﬂow and scene ﬂow algorithms when
replacing traditional descriptors.
Consistency and distinctiveness [35]. Zhang and Wah
argue that almost all existing problems in dense matching

5
Fig. 3. Evolution of stereo algorithms. From left, reference image from KITTI 2015, disparity maps by SGM [26], MC-CNN-acrt [27] and DispNetC
[11]. Learned matching costs outperform traditional pipelines, while end-to-end models perform even better in challenging regions (e.g. cars).
are caused by features that violate the principle of consis-
tency, the principle of distinctiveness or both. Consistency
requires that a given point should have similar descriptors
when it is observed from different viewpoints. Distinctive-
ness states that a feature should be different from other
pixels in its surrounding regions. The author seek guide
features in a deep multi-objective optimization framework
incorporating both principles.
CBMV [36]. Batsos et al. propose a method for learning
the matching volume leveraging both data with ground
truth and conventional wisdom. A random forest classiﬁer
determines the likelihood of whether a given disparity for
a pixel is correct based on a combination of hand-crafted
matching functions and long-range constraints. The result-
ing cost volume is optimized as in [27], leading to similar
accuracy when testing in the training domain, but much
better generalization across different domains.
Weakly-supervised deep metric [37]. Learned matching
functions achieve high accuracy, but require substantial
amounts of annotated data for training. Tulyakov et al.
propose an effective strategy to leverage coarse information
from the stereo setup, such as epipolar, uniqueness, smooth-
ness and ordering constraints, to obtain weak supervision
from stereo pairs with spare or no ground truth. Despite the
weak supervision, the learned matching functions perform
as well as those trained conventionally.
3.2
Optimization
After initial cost volume computation, optimization is cru-
cial for gathering information from a larger context and
overcoming the limitations of pixel-wise matching. SGM
[26] is by far the most popular conventional technique for
cost volume optimization; as a result, improving it via learn-
ing has received attention from the research community.
GCP [38], [39]. Based on the assumption that reliable
pixels can be used to inﬂuence neighboring pixels within
a global optimization framework, Spyropoulos et al. select
highly reliable pixels, detected by a random forest classiﬁer,
as ground control points (GCPs). GCPs are, then, used to
introduce soft constraints into the matching volume, which
is optimized using MRF energy minimization [40].
LevStereo [41], [42]. Park and Yoon propose a general-
ized modulation strategy in order to improve the robustness
and the accuracy of widely used stereo matching algorithms
such as SGM. More speciﬁcally, cost curves of an initial
cost volume showing evidence of low conﬁdence values are
ﬂattened while highly conﬁdent pixels are left unchanged.
This modulation scheme is effective because it enhances
the importance of reliable matching costs inside the SGM
aggregation step, allowing reliable pixels to guide disparity
estimation for unreliable ones.
O1 [43], [44]. By analyzing in depth the SGM algorithm
and observing that the Scanline Optimization (SO) strategy
causes streaking artifacts in the ﬁnal disparity map, Poggi
and Mattoccia propose a more effective measure computed
on features extracted from the disparity map only in con-
stant time. Speciﬁcally, the standard SO scheme is replaced
with a smarter strategy that properly weights the matching
costs computed for each independent path using the corre-
sponding conﬁdence score. This leads to visible artifacts in
the disparity map being considerably alleviated.
PBCP [45]. Seki and Pollefeys argue that not all pixels
should be subject to the same smoothness penalties in
SGM optimization. If penalties were decreased at the most
conﬁdent pixels, scanline optimization would propagate
information from reliable to unreliable pixels. This can be
achieved by changing the SGM formulation, by adjusting
the smoothness penalty parameters per pixel according to
conﬁdence scores, estimated by a CNN processing the initial
WTA left and right disparity maps.
SGM-Net [46]. Seki and Pollefeys extend PBCP to distin-
guish between positive and negative disparity transitions
along the scanlines, since they signify different occlusion
relationships. They introduce a new loss function, that in-
cludes path and neighbor costs by taking into account the
cost of the disparity path over a scanline compared to the
ground truth and transitions between neighboring pixels,
respectively.
SGM-Forest
[47].
Following
the
rationale
in
[43],
Sch¨onberger et al. develop a random forest classiﬁer for im-
proving the selection among disparity values for a pixel pro-
posed by multiple scanlines in SGM. The classiﬁer considers
disparities and optimized costs per scanline to produce per-
pixel scores, used both to combine the disparity hypotheses
from the different scanlines, as well as to obtain conﬁdence.
3.3
Reﬁnement
The last step of the pipeline aims to reﬁne the estimated
disparity map. Traditionally, image processing techniques
like median or bilateral ﬁltering are used for this task, after a
left-right consistency check. Recently, neural networks have
been proposed to replace traditional image ﬁlters.
GDN [48]. Shaked and Wolf develop a multi-stage
architecture, named L-ResMatch, that addresses cost vol-
ume reﬁnement in its last stage. L-ResMatch begins with
a residual network that learns a matching cost function.
Then, traditional aggregation steps like CBCA and SGM
[27] are applied. Finally, a Global Disparity Network (GDN)
locally reﬁnes the optimized cost volume to further improve
the quality of the ﬁnal disparity map, while predicting a
conﬁdence estimate for each pixel at the same time.
Detect Replace Reﬁne (DRR) [49]. Gidaris and Ko-
modakis present the DRR algorithm, which decomposes
label improvement in a detection, a replacement and a
reﬁnement step. DRR is based on the hypothesis that hard

6
mistakes should be detected and replaced, because correct-
ing them does not depend on the wrong input estimates,
while soft mistakes can be corrected by additive reﬁne-
ment. The authors show that further improvements can be
achieved if the network is applied iteratively.
Order-based Surface Decision (OSD) [50]. Ye et al.
extend DRR [49] by distinguishing among different failure
modes of the matching process. Different strategies for
each case, and corresponding sub-networks that implement
them, are introduced. The resulting system is able to im-
prove the outputs of a diverse set of matching algorithms
on the Middlebury 2014 benchmark.
RecResNet [51]. Batsos and Mordohai apply a dense
label correction algorithm, implemented as a recurrent,
residual network, to an input disparity map estimated by
a black box stereo algorithm. The output disparity map is
generated based on the noisy input disparity map and the
left image by applying a combination of residuals computed
at multiple scales, to correct heterogeneous types of errors.
The same network is applied recurrently to its own output
to make further improvements.
LRCR [52]. Taking advantage of disparity estimates from
both the left and the right view, the Left-Right Comparative
Recurrent (LRCR) model embeds the left-right consistency
check into a uniﬁed pipeline in order to improve the ﬁnal
disparity estimate. A soft attention mechanism, jointly with
recurrent learning, is in charge of selecting areas in the
images for reﬁnement, thus guiding the network to correct
errors mainly on unreliable initial depth estimates.
VN [53]. Departing from the more common reﬁnement
processes based on residual corrections, Kn¨obelreiter and
Pock propose a learning-based model built on a variational
reﬁnement network for the same purpose. In particular, the
network takes the RGB image, the initial disparity map and
a conﬁdence measure as input, and performs collaborative
denoising, considering that errors can be identiﬁed by con-
sidering the three inputs jointly.
3.4
Experimental comparison
In this section, we report a quantitative comparison between
the approaches that apply learning to stages of the stereo
pipeline discussed so far. To ensure a fair comparison, we
retrieve results from popular online benchmarks for stereo
matching [7], [8], [9], [10]. Since not all methods have been
submitted to the online benchmarks, we focus on the subset
providing such results. If available, we select results not
labelled ROB since training is likely to be on the data
provided by the benchmark itself.
KITTI 2015 [9].
Table 1 shows results of methods
covered in this section on the KITTI 2015 leaderboard. At
the bottom of the table, we also report the results of SGM, as
a non data-driven baseline, highlighted in yellow. First, we
can see how all methods outperform SGM by a large margin.
MC-CNN achieves a major boost in accuracy, while PBCP
and SGM-Net that built upon it further improve in accuracy.
Unsurprisingly, disparity reﬁnement approaches attain the
best results among methods reviewed in this section since
they are applied on the output of other algorithms.
Middlebury 2014 [8]. Table 2 summarizes results from
the Middlebury benchmark. In this case, we can see how
KITTI 2015 [9]
Method
D1-bg% (↓) D1-fg% (↓) D1-all% (↓) time (s) (↓)
LRCR [54]
2.55
5.42
3.03
49.2
RecResNet [51]
2.46
6.30
3.10
1.3
DRR [49]
2.58
6.04
3.16
0.4
L-ResMatch [48]
2.72
6.95
3.42
48
PBCP [45]
2.58
8.74
3.61
68
SGM-Net [46]
2.66
8.64
3.66
67
MC-CNN-acrt [27]
2.89
8.88
3.89
67
SGM-Forest [47]
3.11
10.74
4.38
6
Content-CNN [32]
3.73
8.58
4.54
1
VN [53]
4.29
7.65
4.85
0.5
CBMV [36]
4.17
9.53
5.06
250
OpenCV-SGBM [26]
8.92
20.59
10.86
1.1
TABLE 1
KITTI 2015 leaderboard [9], showing methods learning stages of the
pipeline.
Middlebury 2014 [8]
ETH3D [10]
Method
Res. bad 2.0% (↓) avg. px (↓) bad 1.0% (↓) avg. px (↓)
SGM-Forest [47]
H
7.37
2.84
4.96
0.36
MC-CNN-acrt [27]
H
8.08
3.82
-
-
CBMV [36]
H
11.1
4.71
5.35
0.33
VN [53]
H
14.2
2.49
-
-
SGM [26]
H
18.4
5.32
10.08
0.50
TABLE 2
Middlebury 2014 [8] and ETH3D [10] leaderboards, showing
methods learning stages of the pipeline.
SGM-forest performs much better compared to what is
observed on KITTI. Methods leveraging on deeper models,
such as reﬁnement techniques, do not appear on this online
benchmark. The same is true for end-to-end models that we
are going to discuss in the remainder. This is due to the
small number of training images available for ﬁne-tuning
these more complex networks.
ETH3D [10]. We report, for the sake of completeness, re-
sults on the ETH3D in Table 2 although this benchmark was
published later than the ones above. SGM-forest conﬁrms
its good performance on ETH3D as well.
4
END-TO-END DEEP LEARNING
Although machine learning substantially improved each
step of the traditional stereo matching pipeline [1], the
introduction of end-to-end models drove the community
towards a new paradigm. As can be seen in popular bench-
marks, KITTI 2012 [7] and 2015 [9], in just a few years,
end-to-end methods dominated dense disparity estimation,
thanks to the availability of large amounts of labeled data.
Indeed, while few hundred annotated images [7], [8], [9]
are enough to train learning-based pipeline stages, they are
not for end-to-end models. However, thousands of labeled
pairs can be made available for free using graphics [11], [13],
overcoming the costly and cumbersome process of labeling a
large number of images with accurate depth measurements.
The rest of this section is organized as follows: Section 4.1
introduces a taxonomy of deep models for end-to-end dis-
parity estimation, divided in 2D and 3D architectures. We re-
view the most relevant models for both classes in Section 4.2
and Section 4.3, respectively. Finally, Section 4.4 summarizes
the performance of these networks on the benchmarks.
4.1
Taxonomy
According to the popular online benchmarks [7], [8], [9],
[10], there are hundreds of published, and unpublished,
deep networks competing for the top ranks. We can broadly

7
categorize them into two distinct classes according to their
design: 2D architectures and 3D architectures.
The main
difference between the two is the strategy deployed to
encode features and geometry. Next, we discuss the differ-
ences between the two categories, while introducing models
from the literature belonging to both, highlighting their
distinctive features and the rationale behind their design.
For additional details, such as training schedules or layer
conﬁguration, we refer readers to the corresponding papers.
4.2
2D architectures
This family of deep networks is closer to neural models
designed to solve other dense regression tasks such as
semantic segmentation [55], optical ﬂow [56] or monocular
depth estimation [57]. These architectures usually deploy
an encoder-decoder design, inspired by the U-Net model
[58] to keep memory requirements and runtime manageable
as well as to increase the receptive ﬁeld of the network to
leverage image context. Thanks to the efﬁciency of 2D con-
volution operations on modern GPUs, some of these models
achieve from a few to dozens of frames per second at the
cost of a negligible loss of accuracy [59], [60]. Pivotal to the
spread of these architectures is the work by Mayer et al. [11]
that introduced a custom layer, namely the correlation layer,
in charge of computing similarity scores between features
extracted from the two images.
DispNet-C [11]. The work by Mayer et al. [11] is a
milestone for the switch to end-to-end disparity regres-
sion. Following the U-Net design [58], the authors propose
DispNet-S, an encoder-decoder architecture. The ﬁrst por-
tion of the architecture feeds the input images to several
2D convolutional layers that decimate the input resolution.
Then, stacks of 2D deconvolution layers gradually restore
the resolution up to half the original, matching the full
resolution using bilinear upsampling. In order to preserve
ﬁne details that were lost during downsampling, features
from the encoding module are concatenated to correspond-
ing ones at the same resolution extracted by the decoder.
Due to this design choice, the network is large enough to
learn disparity inference but is not trained to reason about
correspondences explicitly. This latter behavior is attained
by introducing a correlation layer, previously proposed in
[56], computing similarity between patches x1 and x2 on
the two images:
c(x1, x2) =
X
o∈[−k,k]×[−k,k]
⟨f1(x1 + o), f2(x2 + o)⟩
(1)
with the two patches of size K = 2k+1. Despite the general
formulation, K is typically set to 0, thus computing single-
pixel correlations. A siamese sub-network extracts features
from both images at the beginning. Then, correlating each
patch in the reference image and all candidates in a (2D+1)
search range, yields an equal number of correlation maps,
stacked along the channels dimension and forwarded to
subsequent 2D convolutional layers. According to [11], in-
troducing the correlation layer signiﬁcantly improves the
quality of estimated disparity maps, in particular on real
datasets such as KITTI 2012 and 2015.
CNN+CRF [61]. Although not strictly an end-to-end net-
work, we include the work by Kn¨obelreiter et al. here. The
authors design a joint CNN and Conditional Random Field
(CRF) model to infer dense disparity maps. Joint training
is made possible by formulating the CRF as a maximum
margin Markov network. We consider this as an interesting
intermediate step between models aimed at implementing
single steps in the pipeline and a fully end-to-end CNN.
CRL [62]. Although DispNet-C fails to outperform con-
ventional hand-engineered stereo pipelines such as [27], it
paved the way for the deployment of more sophisticated
deep models. The ﬁrst 2D architecture to rise in the KITTI
leaderboards is the one by Pang et al. . Starting from the
observation that learning a residual signal [63] is usually
easy for a neural network, the authors combine a DispNet-
C model with a second subnetwork, referred to as DispRes-
Net, which is in charge of computing residual corrections
to the initial disparity map, d1, estimated by the DispNet-C
subnetwork. To do so, d1 is used to warp the right input
image towards the left. The left image, the warped right
image and their difference are fed to the DispResNet module
which determines the adjustment to d1.
iResNet [64]. Liang et al. develop a deep network,
inspired by the different steps in the conventional stereo
pipeline. The ﬁrst portion extracts features at multiple scales
and feeds them to a correlation layer, producing an initial
disparity estimate. Then, as in CRL, this estimate is used to
warp right-image features to the left camera, before being
passed to a reﬁnement module made of a new correlation
layer with smaller search range and additional 2D convo-
lution and deconvolution operators. This module is stacked
multiple times for iterative reﬁnement, and the architecture
is dubbed the Iterative Residual Network (iResNet). iResNet
ranked ﬁrst in the 2018 Robust Vision Challenge.
DispNet-CSS [16]. Following the successful ﬁndings
about residual learning, Ilg et al. address occlusions, mo-
tion and depth boundary estimation. Speciﬁcally, a stack of
networks iteratively produces improved predictions, which
are followed by subsequent residual reﬁnements. Either a
DispNet-CSS or a FlowNet-CSS can be trained for stereo
matching or optical ﬂow estimation, respectively, based on
this scheme. In both cases, only the ﬁrst subnetwork deploys
a correlation layer. Combining the two CSS architectures, the
authors also estimate scene ﬂow.
AutoDispNet-CSS
[17].
While
a
general-purpose
encoder-decoder can perform reasonably well if trained
for a speciﬁc task, the literature (and this survey as well)
supports the thesis that careful design choices and tuning
are necessary to obtain a state-of-the-art model. These can be
accomplished automatically using auto machine learning (au-
toML) to optimize for the best stereo matching architecture.
By deﬁning a set of candidate operations, e.g. 2D convolu-
tions and upsampling layers, Saikia et al. use the gradient-
based method DARTS [65] to explore the space of architec-
tures and ﬁnd the best conﬁguration for DispNet. Despite
deploying only a subset of the possible design choices
among the candidate layers, the obtained AutoDispNet-CSS
performs comparably to state-of-the-art.
MADNet [60]. Although most of the architectures focus
on accuracy, efﬁciency is also crucial, in particular in real-
world applications. Tonioni et al. apply a coarse-to-ﬁne
strategy within their Modularly Adaptive Network (MADNet).
Starting from the coarser level of a feature pyramid ex-

8
tracted from each image, features are fed to a correlation
layer, then an initial disparity map is predicted by a 2D
convolutional decoder and upsampled to the previous level
of the pyramid. This predicted disparity is used to warp
the right features to the left view, feeding them to another
correlation layer with a small search range to estimate a
better disparity map. The procedure continues until the
highest resolution, where a reﬁnement network with 2D
dilated convolutions produces the ﬁnal disparity map.
HD3 [59]. Along these lines, a coarse-to-ﬁne strategy has
been exploited by other authors. Yin et al. couple it with
discrete distribution estimation, which is used to estimate
the degree of uncertainty of the predicted values, an aspect
typically neglected by the regression approaches discussed
so far. Following a pyramidal approach similar to [60], a
correlation layer is fed with left and warped right features
and a decoder extracts features in the density embedding
space in order to predict a ﬁnal match density. The conver-
sion between dense distributions and motion ﬁelds (either
ﬂow or disparities) and vice-versa is necessary to handle
upsampling and to generate supervision for the next level.
SegStereo [66]. Multi-task learning [67] has gained pop-
ularity in various areas of computer vision, where joint
learning of multiple tasks leads to overall improvement in
all tasks. Following this rationale, Yang et al. propose Seg-
Stereo for joint disparity estimation and semantic segmen-
tation. The network extracts a representation with shared
features for both tasks. The features are used as input to
a correlation layer and a segmentation subnetwork. The
output correlation maps and semantic embeddings are con-
catenated and forwarded to an encoder-decoder producing
the disparity map. Semantic masks are obtained for both the
left and right views and forced to be consistent by warping
them according to the predicted disparity. Tackled together,
both tasks achieve improved results.
EdgeStereo [68], [69]. Depth discontinuities represent
some of the most challenging regions in the image for
stereo matching. Evidence for this can be observed by
looking at qualitative examples of disparity maps from
the KITTI online benchmarks [7], [9]. Motivated by this
evidence, Song et al. jointly learn disparity estimation and
edge segmentation within their EdgeStereo framework. An
edge detection subnetwork extracts a set of features used
to estimate an edge map. They are processed together with
conventional correlation scores to obtain the ﬁnal disparity
map, improving accuracy near depth discontinuities.
DSNet [70]. Following the multi-task trend, Zhan et al.
propose a network with an encoder which is shared be-
tween semantic segmentation and disparity estimation, and
is trained in a multi-stage manner. At ﬁrst, it is optimized
for semantic segmentation; then, the weights are ﬁxed and
used to learn disparity estimation by means of a matching
module combining feature correlation and concatenation
by means of attention mechanisms. Finally, a third stages
optimizes the model for both tasks jointly.
SENSE [71]. Another step in the direction of multi-
task learning is performed by Jiang et al. , proposing a
single, compact architecture estimating disparity, optical
ﬂow, disparity change and semantic segmentation at once.
Starting from a single, shared encoder, different decoders
are introduced for each task.
Unsupervised Stereo [72]. Although they achieve com-
pelling results, deep networks are heavily dependant on the
amount and variety of the labeled training data. To simplify
the training process of deep stereo networks, Zhou et al.
propose an end-to-end framework capable of learning dis-
parity estimation in an unsupervised manner. A 2D network
with an image-guided aggregation network is designed to
estimate disparity maps for the left and right images. Then,
left-right consistent matches are used to train the network
iteratively on its own predictions. Moreover, the proposed
architecture has accuracy comparable to DispNet-C, when
trained with supervision.
4.3
3D architectures
Whereas 2D networks are much closer to traditional neural
models, 3D architectures were developed speciﬁcally for
stereo matching. Although the traditional encoder-decoder
design is embodied by these frameworks as well, they differ
from the previous category by explicitly encoding geometry
during the processing of the features.
Conversely to 2D
models, 3D networks explicitly encode matching properties
between pixels in the form of feature vectors utilizing dif-
ferent operators, e.g. concatenation and feature difference.
By performing this operation on the entire search range D,
3D architectures produce an output volume of increased
dimensionality: D × H × W, times the amount of features
F, resulting in a 4D data structure. Subsequently, the 4D
tensor is processed by 3D convolutions, resulting in explicit
processing of a matching volume-like representation. This
strategy comes at the cost of a much higher memory re-
quirements and runtime.
GC-Net [73]. This framework represents the ﬁrst attempt
to deploy explicit knowledge about geometry to design a 3D
neural network for stereo matching. It also was the ﬁrst end-
to-end model to outperform hand-crafted pipelines on the
KITTI benchmarks. High-level features are extracted from
both images using two encoders with shared weights. In this
phase, the original resolution is halved to reduce memory
requirements and then a cost volume is built by concate-
nating per-pixel features F across the two images on the
entire disparity search range, producing a D
2 × W
2 × H
2 ×2F
volume. Then, a 3D encoder-decoder module processes the
volume to obtain a ﬁnal D×H ×W ×1 volume, from which
the disparity map is obtained using the soft-argmin operator
soft-argmin =
D
X
d=0
d · σ(−cd)
(2)
with σ the softmax operator applied to each ﬁnal feature cd
along the D dimension.
ECA
[74].
Following
this
successful,
new
design
paradigm, several authors focused on further boosting the
accuracy of 3D networks. Yu et al. propose to improve the 3D
optimization phase by introducing Explicit Cost Aggregation
(ECA) modules along the three different dimensions. This
goal was achieved by adding a set of 3D convolutions
having rectangular ﬁlters, with kernel size equal to 1 on
all but one dimensions, keeping a low computational cost
compared to traditional 3D convolutions. A further guided
aggregation strategy is proposed, directly learning from the

9
image a set of guides to be applied to the ﬁnal cost volume
before the softargmin selection.
PSMNet [75]. Although an encoder-decoder structure
allows for taking into account large context information dur-
ing the learning process, in 3D networks this stage occurs
only after the cost volume computation, which depends on
very local features. Advances in deep learning introduced
new layers capable of greatly enlarging the receptive ﬁeld
of a neural network with a negligible computational cost,
as in the case of Spatial Pyramidal Pooling layers (SPP) [76]
adopted by Chang and Chen in their Pyramidal Stereo Match-
ing network (PSMNet). Integrating SPP layers in the GC-
Net feature extractor, together with deploying a stack of
multiple 3D encoder-decoder modules proved to be effec-
tive at improving accuracy. In order to keep computational
costs manageable, features are extracted down to quarter
resolution before building the cost volume, thus leading to
about twice as fast inference compared to GC-Net [73].
EMCUA [77]. Other authors worked on expanding the
contextual information processed by neural networks in the
early stages. Nie et al. introduce Multi-level Context Ultra-
Aggregation (MCUA). Given a branch working at a certain
resolution (i.e. half) in a dense network, a child module,
sharing weights with the main branch, is deployed to pro-
cess a downsampled version of the same features (i.e. at
quarter resolution). Usually, the output of the main branch
reaches the same lower resolution and is processed by a new
branch. At this point, features extracted by each layer of
the child module are densely connected to this new branch,
actually implementing inter-level interactions.
CSPN [78] To further improve PSMNet performance,
Cheng et al. [78] propose Convolutional Spatial Propagation
Network (CSPN) modules, capable of learning an afﬁnity
matrix for feature aggregation and spatial propagation of
2D unary features. By extending CSPN design to 3D, infor-
mation is also propagated within the disparity dimension,
enabling aggregation over both spatial and cost dimensions
when processing features from 3D encoder-decoders.
GA-Net [79]. Matching cost aggregation is crucial in con-
ventional methods, where local aggregation techniques [80],
[81] or semi-global optimization [26] are widely adopted.
Cost aggregation is beneﬁcial even in deep neural networks,
as demonstrated by the efforts to improve the design of
encoder-decoder modules. Zhang et al. propose two novel
layers, aimed at capturing local and global cost relation-
ships. They are a locally guided aggregation layer and a
semi-global aggregation layer, respectively implementing a
traditional cost ﬁltering strategy and a differentiable ap-
proximation of the SGM algorithm. By replacing 3D con-
volutions with few instances of these layers, their Guided
Aggregation network (GA-Net) easily outperforms models
deploying dozens of traditional, costly convolutions.
StereoDRNet [82]. Although accurate, deep stereo net-
works often produce geometrically inconsistent disparity
maps, which negatively affect higher-level applications such
as 3D reconstruction via Truncated Surface Distance Function
(TSDF) fusion. This leads Chabra et al. to improve PSMNet
design [75] to obtain more geometrically consistent predic-
tions and thus better 3D reconstructions by fusing them.
Their contributions include the use of a Vortex pooling layer
[83] which proved to be more effective compared to the
SPP layer, the introduction of 3D dilated convolutions inside
the stacked encoder-decoders, and a reﬁnement network for
enhancing the initial disparity map.
PDSNet [84]. Most deep networks are memory-hungry
and have to be trained for a given target disparity
range. Tulyakov et al. propose Practical Deep Stereo Network
(PDSNet) to address both limitations. They decrease the
memory footprint by introducing a bottleneck matching
module, which compresses the concatenated features from
the two images into compact matching signatures, pro-
cessed by a 3D encoder-decoder network to infer a sub-pixel
MAP approximation. Thus, a weighted mean is computed
around the disparity with the maximum posterior, which is
robust to erroneous modes in the disparity distribution and
allows to modify the disparity range without re-training. A
novel sub-pixel criterion, derived by combining the stan-
dard cross-entropy loss with kernel interpolation, leads to
faster convergence rates and higher accuracy.
StereoNet [85]. A weakness of 3D architectures com-
pared to 2D models is the computational effort required
even for a single inference. On average, 3D networks have
about one order of magnitude higher memory requirements
and runtime because of the additional dimension. The most
expensive operations are those performed at the highest res-
olutions, thus Khamis et al. design a 3D model limited to a
low-resolution volume (i.e. 1
8), from which a coarse disparity
map is extracted. This latter is sequentially upsampled and
reﬁned through shallow 2D networks. Thanks to the much
lower complexity of 2D convolutions, StereoNet achieves
much higher throughput than 3D networks at the cost of a
marginal accuracy drop.
AnyNet [86]. Coarse-to-ﬁne strategies that proved to be
successful for 2D architectures have also been proposed for
3D networks. Concurrently to works on 2D networks [59],
[60], Wang et al. deploy a pyramidal model that extracts
a small number of feature maps from the images and
then builds a very compact 4D volume by computing the
L1 distance between left and (warped) right features. The
network works at three scales, deploying a coarse to ﬁne
disparity estimation strategy. After the last prediction, a
Spatial Propagation network (SPNet [87]) produces the ﬁnal
output. The authors also endow their AnyNet model with
an early-stopping functionality at anytime, i.e. inference can
be shortened to obtain one of the coarser disparity maps,
allowing for speed-accuracy trade-offs, as in the case of real-
world applications with limited resources.
HSM [88]. High-resolution images have always been
challenging for stereo matching, in particular in terms of
resource requirements. As we observed so far, a standard
strategy is to reduce the target resolution and rely on up-
sampling to restore it after inference. High-resolution stereo
matching has been tackled by Yang et al. with the Hierarchical
Stereo Matching (HSM) network. Following the pyramidal
approaches discussed above, they extract a set of features
at different resolutions and compute cost volumes with
different search ranges according to the resolution. Each
volume is processed to obtain a disparity map, upsampled
to be concatenated with higher resolution volumes, and
processed to produce ﬁner disparity maps. For training, the
authors propose a new, high resolution set of images (about
2056 × 2464) combined with available high [8] and low-

10
KITTI 2015 [9]
Method
Family
D1-bg% (↓) D1-fg% (↓) D1-all% (↓) time (s)
CSPN [78]
3D
1.51
2.88
1.74
1.0
GA-Net [79]
3D
1.48
3.46
1.81
1.8
HD3-Stereo [59]
2D
1.70
3.63
2.02
0.14
EMCUA [77]
3D
1.66
4.27
2.09
0.90
GWC-Net [89]
3D
1.74
3.93
2.11
0.32
SSPCV-Net [90]
3D
1.75
3.89
2.11
0.9
HSM [88]
3D
1.80
3.85
2.14
0.14
DeepPruner [91]
3D
1.87
3.56
2.15
0.18
DispNet-CSS [16]
2D
1.92
3.32
2.16
0.25
AutoDispNet-CSS [17]
2D
1.94
3.37
2.18
0.90
SENSE [71]
2D
2.07
3.01
2.22
0.32
SegStereo [66]
2D
1.88
4.07
2.25
0.60
StereoDRNet [82]
3D
1.72
4.95
2.26
0.23
PSMNet [75]
3D
1.86
4.62
2.32
0.41
ECA [74]
3D
2.14
3.45
2.36
0.22
iResNet [64]
2D
2.25
3.40
2.44
0.27
PDSNet [84]
3D
2.29
4.05
2.58
0.50
EdgeStereo [68]
2D
2.27
4.18
2.59
0.27
CRL [62]
2D
2.48
3.59
2.67
0.47
GC-Net [73]
3D
2.21
6.16
2.87
0.90
CNN+CRF [61]
2D+CRF
-
-
3.61
1.3
MC-CNN-acrt [27]
-
2.89
8.88
3.89
67
DispNet-C [11]
2D
4.32
4.41
4.34
0.06
MADNet [60]
2D
3.75
9.20
4.66
0.02
StereoNet [85]
3D
4.30
7.45
4.83
0.02
OASM-Net [92]
3D
6.89
19.42
8.98
0.73
OpenCV-SGBM [26]
-
8.92
20.59
10.86
1.1
TABLE 3
KITTI 2015 leaderboard [9], showing end-to-end methods.
resolution [7], [9], [10] datasets. Moreover, they discuss the
possibility of anytime on-demand inference, as in [86].
GWC-Net [89]. Various approaches for building volumes
for 3D networks have been proposed, including feature
concatenation, L1 or L2 distance. Guo et al. propose a new
operator, namely Group Wise Correlation layer (GWC), placed
in between feature concatenation and vector correlation. By
treating the F unary features as N groups of structured
vectors, the group-wise correlation layer computes N cor-
relation scores, producing as output a new feature vector of
dimension N. The fact that N is strictly smaller than F by
deﬁnition reduces the computational efforts required by the
ﬁrst 3D convolutions, which are the most expensive ones
due to the higher resolution. Moreover, this scheme pro-
vides a better feature representation enabling the network
to infer more accurate disparity maps.
DeepPruner [91]. Another strategy for reducing the
computational burden in 3D networks is to compute the
matching costs for only a subset of all possible disparity
hypotheses. To this aim, Duggal et al. deploy the PatchMatch
algorithm [93] unrolled as a recurrent neural network to it-
eratively select random candidates, propagate them locally,
and keep only the most promising ones. Moreover, a con-
ﬁdence score, which is inversely proportional to the range
between the minimum and maximum disparity candidates,
can be obtained for each pixel.
SSPCV-Net [90]. As proved by 2D networks, [66], [70],
joint reasoning about disparity and semantics is beneﬁcial
to both. Along these lines, Wu et al. design a 3D network to
pursue both tasks by leveraging on pyramidal cost volumes
that are subsequently summed up at each resolution from
coarse to ﬁne. Moreover, from features relevant to segmen-
tation a semantic cost volume is built and combined with
the spatial volume to further include semantic information
during disparity regression.
OASM-Net
[92].
Although
unsupervised
learning
proved to be effective thanks to image reprojection, its major
shortcoming is at occlusions, where the reprojection fails
Middlebury 2014 [8]
ETH3D [10]
Method
Family
Res. bad 2.0%(↓) avg. px (↓) bad 1.0% (↓) avg. px (↓)
MC-CNN-acrt [27]
-
H
8.08
3.82
-
-
HSM [88]
3D
F
10.2
2.07
4.00
0.28
CNN+CRF [61]
2D+CRF
H
12.5
-
-
-
SGM [26]
-
H
18.4
5.32
10.08
0.50
EdgeStereo [68]
2D
F
18.7
2.68
-
-
DispNet-CSS [16]
2D
H
22.8
4.04
2.69
0.22
iResNet [64]
2D
H
22.9
3.31
3.68
0.24
StereoDRNet [82]
3D
-
-
-
4.46
0.27
DeepPruner [91]
3D
Q
30.1
4.80
3.52
0.26
PSMNet [75]
3D
Q
42.1
6.68
5.02
0.33
TABLE 4
Middlebury 2014 [8] and ETH3D [10] leaderboards, showing
end-to-end methods.
to provide meaningful supervision. Li et al. address this
problem by training a 3D network to jointly infer disparity
and occlusions from a stereo pair. In addition to traditional
reprojection losses [94], a regularization term allows for
effective segmentation of occlusions, in order to properly
take advantage of this information when computing the
reprojection signals.
4.4
Experimental comparison
In this section, we report a quantitative comparison between
the end-to-end architectures discussed so far. At ﬁrst, we
point out that each framework was trained according to
different protocols (e.g. number of iterations, learning rate
schedules, etc.). Thus, an entirely fair comparison is not
possible without using the same protocol for each network.
Nonetheless, we believe that we can fairly compare net-
works based on their top-performing conﬁguration reported
on the leaderboards.
KITTI 2015 [9].
The KITTI dataset is the preferred
benchmark for deep stereo models, thanks to the low-
variability image content of the driving scenario and a large
number of training samples available for ﬁne-tuning. This
fact becomes apparent after observing the number of deep
learning entries in the leaderboard: at the time of writing
more than 100 top entries make reference to deep architec-
tures, published or unpublished. Indeed, all the methods
discussed in Section 4.2 and Section 4.3 are available on the
online benchmark, with only a few exceptions [70], [72], [86],
[92]. Table 3 collects them for a direct comparison, reporting
also results for SGM and MC-CNN-acrt as baselines (high-
lighted in yellow). As in Section 3.4, we show D1-bg, D1-fg,
and D1-all metrics together with the runtime reported by
the authors, although measured on different hardware.
We observe that faster models (DispNet-C, MADNet and
StereoNet) aiming for real-time performance achieve the
worse D1-all score among all methods including the MC-
CNN-acrt pipeline. We also point out that unsupervised
models like OASM-Net already outperform conventional
non-data-driven algorithms like SGM. The ﬁrst end-to-end
method outperforming MC-CNN-acrt is by Kn¨obelreiter et
al. [61], combining a CNN and a CRF. Nevertheless, al-
most all end-to-end CNNs outperform this hybrid strategy.
Climbing the leaderboard, we can observe how most of 3D
architectures consistently outperform 2D stereo networks,
with few exceptions [59], hinting that the former family
excels at modeling geometry . Nevertheless, we also observe
that early 3D models were particularly slow, e.g. GC-Net

11
[73], while the latest methods from this category are much
faster, as in the case of GWC-Net [89]. CSPN [78] is the top-
performing, published model on KITTI. Overall, we believe
that HSM and HD3 represent the best trade-off between
accuracy and speed.
Middlebury 2014 [8]. Even though end-to-end models
excel on the KITTI benchmark yielding small error rates,
we are far from considering stereo as a solved problem.
In particular, as clearly demonstrated by the Middlebury
2014 benchmark, high-resolution images depicting hetero-
geneous indoor environments and the meager amount of
available training samples pose a major challenge for most
neural networks. Therefore, this dataset is less popular for
evaluating new architectures, indeed only ﬁve of the frame-
works discussed in this section appear in the leaderboard,
and they are not near the top.
Table 4 collects these results. We can notice how, in gen-
eral, the percentage of bad pixels is much higher compared
to KITTI, with average pixel errors higher than the preﬁxed
threshold. The much higher resolution (∼20× compared to
KITTI) and complexity of the scenes play a crucial role in
making this dataset much more challenging for end-to-end
models. Moreover, most methods cannot afford to process
full resolution images during inference, with EdgeStereo
and HSM the only models somehow dealing with them.
In particular, the latter achieves the best results among all
architectures, conﬁrming the effectiveness of the hierarchical
approach for high-resolution images. Nevertheless, it ranks
only 31st on the online leaderboard. This fact highlights that
end-to-end models are still far from being state-of-the-art
for stereo in any environment: indeed, the MC-CNN-acrt
pipeline [27] outperforms most end-to-end models, except
HSM on average error. This emphasizes how future research
should focus on the development of robust networks better
generalizing over content and resolution.
ETH3D [10].
Table 4 also collects the submissions to
the ETH3D online benchmark by end-to-end approaches.
Despite the limited training samples available, given the less
heterogeneous image content and the much lower image
resolution compared to the Middlebury 2014 dataset, the
error rates achieved by the ﬁve architectures appearing
in the leaderboard are much lower, with DispNet-CSS be-
ing the top-performing method among all submissions to
the benchmark. This outcome conﬁrms how most of the
open challenges for deep stereo models are linked to high-
resolution images together with complexity and variety of
the observed environment.
5
CONFIDENCE ESTIMATION
Almost in parallel to the ﬁrst attempts of replacing single
steps in the stereo pipeline, learning-based conﬁdence esti-
mation [96], aiming to predict reliability of the disparity as-
signed to each pixel, gained popularity. The ﬁrst approaches
relied on random forest classiﬁers [38], [39], [41], [42], [43],
[44], [97] fed with conventional (i.e. not learning-based)
features [98], while the most recent ones on CNNs [45],
[99], [100]. Conﬁdence estimators are typically trained on
the output of a stereo algorithm using a two-class (inlier,
outlier) label for each pixel, obtained from ground truth
depth data by setting a threshold to distinguish between
inliers and outliers in the output of the considered stereo
algorithm. Moreover, techniques for self-supervised training
of conﬁdence estimators from video sequences [101] or
traditional conﬁdence measures [102] have been proposed
in the literature.
Starting from the recent review and evaluation reported
in [96], we introduce and classify novel approaches which
have appeared since then. Speciﬁcally, we divide these
techniques into two categories: those operating in the dis-
parity/image domain and those processing the cost volume.
Fig. 4 shows an example of a disparity map and the associ-
ated conﬁdence map.
5.1
Conﬁdence estimation in disparity/image domain
This family of conﬁdence estimators directly learn the reli-
ability of each pixel from the disparity map, and optionally
the reference image.
Although processing limited cues,
these measures are particularly appealing when the full cost
volume is not available, e.g. when using off-the-shelf stereo
or end-to-end models not having a cost volume at all.
LFN [103]. Fu et al. propose to extend patch-based strate-
gies for conﬁdence estimation from the disparity map [45],
[99], [100] in a Late-Fusion Network (LFN), which combines
features extracted from both the image and disparity map,
and introduce dilated convolutions to further increase the
local context and potentially give more cues to the network
for estimating conﬁdence.
LGC-Net [95]. Tosi et al. extend the previous approach
by considering both local cues (encoded by patches) and
the global context by designing a Local Global Conﬁdence
Network (LGC-Net), combining the large receptive ﬁeld of
a global sub-network with the accuracy on high-frequency
noise enabled by patch-based strategies.
5.2
Conﬁdence estimation using the cost volume
Although the cost volume is often hidden from the end-
user, it provides additional cues that are meaningful to
distinguish reliable disparities from unreliable ones. For
instance, it can encode the presence of multiple cost hy-
potheses competing for the minimum, which is information
that cannot be retrieved from the disparity map alone.
Reﬂective conﬁdence [48]. Following the trend of re-
placing single steps of the stereo pipeline, Shaked and Wolf
propose to jointly estimate a conﬁdence measure together
with cost optimization, before disparity selection. A two-
layer fully connected network processes the matching costs,
predicting conﬁdence together with the ﬁnal disparity map.
Feature Augmentation [104]. As CNN based measures
showed great results processing local cues from the dispar-
ity map, Kim et al. apply the same principle to conﬁdence
estimation based on random forests, by extracting a robust
set of features extracted from super-pixel and concatenated
with per-pixel features, similarly to [105].
Uniﬁed Network [106]. Jointly learning cost optimiza-
tion and conﬁdence estimation by working on small patches
proved to be effective at improving the accuracy of the
ﬁnal disparity map of a stereo pipeline. Thus, Kim et al.
propose a uniﬁed architecture for cost volume optimization
and conﬁdence estimation. A ﬁrst encoder-decoder module
reﬁnes the matching costs with a large receptive ﬁeld in

12
Fig. 4. Example of conﬁdence estimation. From left to right, reference image from KITTI 2012 dataset, disparity map by MC-CNN-fst [27] raw
algorithm and conﬁdence estimation inferred by LGC-Net [95].
order to obtain a more accurate disparity map. Then, a ﬁnal
sub-network processes it together with top-k reﬁned costs
to output a conﬁdence map.
LAF-Net [107]. A larger receptive ﬁeld is usually effec-
tive in improving conﬁdence estimation [95], [106]. The size
of the receptive ﬁeld of a neural network is traditionally
determined by its architecture, i.e. the number of down-
sampling operations performed. Kim et al. develop a novel
model that extracts features from the image, disparity map
and cost volume to infer conﬁdence scores. A key element of
this architecture is the scale inference network, which learns
the scale map and warps the fused conﬁdence features
through convolutional spatial transformer networks [108].
5.3
Experimental comparison
In this section, we report a quantitative comparison between
conﬁdence estimation frameworks. We refer to experiments
reported in [107], since it is the most recent publication
that includes a fair comparison of relevant methods. All
methods have been re-trained by the authors [107] on MPI
Sintel [15] and KITTI 2012 [7]. The Area Under the Curve
(AUC) metric [96], [98] over sparsiﬁcation curves is used to
evaluate the effectiveness of conﬁdence measures with the
error threshold set to 1.
Table 5 reports results on KITTI 2015 and the half-
resolution images of Middlebury 2014.
We also report
the optimal AUC, highlighted in yellow. Conﬁdence es-
timation is carried out on disparity maps generated by
the regular Semi-Global Matching (SGM) algorithm [26]
with a census-based matching cost function and the MC-
CNN-acrt pipeline [27], including SGM optimization and
ﬁltering. The ﬁrst three rows report results of top 3 methods
evaluated in [96], namely O1, PBCP, CCNN. The table shows
how increasing the size of the receptive ﬁelds improves
conﬁdence estimation. Indeed LGC-Net and LAF-Net are
the top-performing methods on both datasets. Moreover,
considering cost volume information together with image
and disparity cues leads to minor improvements, enabling
LAF-Net to achieve the best overall results. Nonetheless, it
is worth pointing out that less constrained methods based
only on image/disparity cues, such as LGC-Net, achieve
very competitive results.
This evaluation, together with those reported in previous
works [96], [98], highlights how conﬁdence measures are
very close to optimal performance when dealing with con-
ventional stereo algorithms, even if they include learning-
based modules. However, the literature lacks papers study-
ing conﬁdence estimation in the case of end-to-end stereo
networks. Although there are published approaches [16],
[109], [110], [111], [112] for estimating the uncertainty of
CNNs, they have not been applied in this speciﬁc ﬁeld so
far, making it an exciting future research direction.
KITTI 2015
Middlebury 2014
Method
SGM MC-CNN-fst SGM MC-CNN-fst
O1 [43]
4.61
2.63
7.91
7.07
PBCP [45]
4.39
2.72
7.91
7.18
CCNN [99]
4.19
2.58
7.69
7.16
LFN [103]
4.05
2.53
7.52
6.92
LGC-Net [113]
3.92
2.36
7.35
6.85
Augment. [104]
4.30
2.94
7.72
7.01
Uniﬁed [106]
4.07
2.50
7.49
6.94
Reﬂective [48]
5.31
2.92
8.06
7.36
LAF-Net [107]
3.85
2.25
7.18
6.83
Optimal
3.48
1.70
5.69
5.27
TABLE 5
Experimental comparison of conﬁdence estimators. AUC scores
(×102) computed on KITTI 2015 and Middlebury 2014 datasets.
6
DOMAIN-SHIFT: CHALLENGES AND SOLUTIONS
We have seen that end-to-end models achieve state-of-the-
art performance on most benchmarks [7], [9], [10] and
yield promising results on more challenging datasets [8],
as shown in Section 4.4. This is made possible by training
deep models on a large enough number of synthetic images
to allow such complex architectures to converge. However,
although thousands of images with different content can
be easily obtained using computer graphic techniques, they
currently fail at modeling many challenging properties of
real imagery. In particular, the inability to accurately model
camera noise, poor illumination conditions, reﬂections or
brightness saturation produce notable loss of accuracy in
disparity estimation on real stereo pairs due to the domain
shift faced by the neural network. Fig. 5 depicts an example
of this phenomenon, showing the disparity maps predicted
by the same model, GWC-Net [89], when trained on syn-
thetic images only or ﬁne-tuned on real images from the
target domain.
Although theoretically possible, it is practically infeasi-
ble to collect enough images with ground truth depth for
all possible real environments. To overcome this limitation,
three main categories of techniques aiming to bridge the gap
between synthetic and real domains have been proposed:
i) image synthesis and domain transfer, ii) self-supervised
adaptation and iii) guided deep-learning. The ﬁrst category
comprises methods that learn a mapping function across
domains [114], [115], in order to make synthetic images
more realistic for ﬁne-tuning or testing. These techniques
are general and can be applied seamlessly to different tasks;
thus are beyond the scope of this survey. Therefore, we will
focus on the remaining two, in Section 6.1 and Section 6.2,
respectively. Since different authors have deployed very
different evaluation protocols, we refer to the papers for the
experimental validation of each method.
6.1
Self-supervised adaptation
Conversely to other tasks for which, although tedious, man-
ual annotation is feasible in an ofﬂine manner (e.g. semantic

13
Fig. 5. Effects of domain-shift. On a KITTI 2015 stereo pair (top), a GWC-Net [89] instance trained on synthetic images [11] produces poor results
(middle) on the road and in reﬂective surfaces. A short ﬁne-tuning on KITTI 2012 dramatically improves the results (bottom).
segmentation or object detection), accurately labeling im-
ages with depth measurements for training requires expen-
sive active sensors, a cumbersome setup with appropriate
calibration and often further ofﬂine reﬁnement.
On the other hand, acquiring unlabelled image pairs
is much simpler since it only requires calibrated stereo
cameras. This makes the possibility of self-adapting a neural
network in the absence of ground truth labels particularly
appealing, since it dramatically reduces the efforts required
to bridge the gap across domains. We distinguish two main
paradigms: ofﬂine and online – in case adaptation is carried
out before encountering the new environment or directly
during deployment in parallel with inference.
6.1.1
Ofﬂine adaptation
We classify into this category techniques that adapt a pre-
trained neural network to a new domain before its de-
ployment. These strategies are similar to conventional ﬁne-
tuning, but do not need ground truth labels.
Conﬁdence-guided Adaptation [116], [117]. Although
traditional algorithms such as SGM [26] are widely outper-
formed by well-trained neural networks, they do not suffer
from large drops in accuracy when applied in different
domains. Moreover, conﬁdence measures [96] proved to be
particularly effective at detecting outliers, making it possible
to ﬁlter out signiﬁcant errors and only keep sparse, but
accurate disparity labels. Driven by this rationale, Tonioni
et al. propose to leverage traditional (i.e. not learning-based)
stereo algorithms, such as SGM [26] or block matching, and
a conﬁdence measure, speciﬁcally CCNN [99], to process
a set of unlabelled stereo pairs in order to retrieve a set
of sparse, yet reliable disparity maps. Such sparse depth
measurements are then used as proxy labels for ﬁne-tuning a
deep network pre-trained on synthetic images only.
Self-supervised CNN-CRF [118]. Following a similar
rationale, Kn¨obelreiter propose to improve the performance
of the CNN-CRF framework [61] to adapt to different image
domains, e.g. to aerial images. In particular, they carry out a
self-supervised training of the CNN in charge of computing
the data term, using as labels the output of the full CNN-
CRF ﬁltered by a left-right consistency check.
Zoom and Learn [119]. Pang et al. observe that process-
ing higher resolution images yields more detailed disparity
maps and leverage this fact to improve the performance of
models trained on different domains. In their Zoom and Learn
framework, a neural network is presented with a stereo
pair and an upsampled version of the same images, thus
training the model to reproduce the results achieved for
the higher resolution images when lower resolution images
are processed. As a result, the model learns to infer ﬁner
details from the images and thus to better tackle difﬁculties
in generalization across domains.
6.1.2
Online adaptation
This paradigm removes the division between the training
and testing phases. It continuously trains the model any
time new data are available, overcoming the need for data
from the new domain before deployment. On the other
hand, adaptation starts at deployment, making early results
inaccurate, but gradually improving over time.
Open World Stereo [120].
Inspired by the possibility
of learning depth estimation through view synthesis [94],
Zhong et al. develop Open World Stereo, which is a 3D
convolutional LSTM capable of fast convergence, typical of
the 3D networks and reinforced by the memory mechanism
introduced by LSTM modules. After an initial, prime training
phase, Open World Stereo is deployed on a new environ-
ment and, for each newly observed stereo pair, estimates an
output disparity map. This latter is used at the same time to
get supervision signals by warping the right image towards
the left and measuring the appearance error with respect to
the left image. Although a single inference takes more than a
second, the network rapidly adapts to the new environment
in a few hundred iterations.
Real-Time Self-Adaptive deep stereo [60]. The possi-
bility of adapting on-the-ﬂy to a new environment is partic-
ularly appealing to make a system truly portable. Tonioni
et al. propose the ﬁrst framework for real-time online self-
adaptation. It relies on the synergy of two main components:
i) a fast, Modularly Adaptive Network (MADNet), already
introduced in Section 4.2, and ii) an effective strategy for
adapting only different portions of the entire network. For
each new incoming stereo pair, a portion is chosen accord-
ing to a heuristic and supervision signals are computed
through warping with the disparity estimated at the chosen
resolution. Finally, back-propagation is performed only in
layers belonging to the selected portion of the network.
This strategy enables very fast back-propagation but, on
the other hand, increases the number of steps required
to converge compared to back-propagating over the entire
network. The result is an approximation over time of full
back-propagation that maintains real-time inference.
Learning to adapt [19]. Efﬁciency, by maximizing accu-
racy improvement out of each adaptation step, is desirable
when adapting online to new environments. To achieve a
starting parameter conﬁguration that is suitable for adap-
tation, Tonioni et al. propose the Learning to Adapt (L2A)
training protocol. By incorporating the adaptation process
itself into the learning objective through meta-learning, the
network is predisposed to a conﬁguration of parameters
that are better suited for online adaptation. This means
that each ofﬂine training iteration mimics online adaptation
steps over a small, synthetic sequence with ground truth.
The performance gain of the adaptation phase is used as
supervision for the network, leading to more efﬁcient opti-

14
mization steps.
6.2
Guided deep learning.
This paradigm differs from previous adaptation techniques
because it aims at mitigating difﬁculties due to domain
shift without requiring explicit on-the-ﬂy ﬁne-tuning. The
rationale behind this approach is to guide a network by
providing external hints. For instance, given sparse depth
information obtained by any means (e.g. LiDAR sensors)
this method aims at overcoming the biases of a network by
driving it to the correct depth values. The idea is that, since
the domain shift issue is due to the appearance gap between
domains (e.g. synthetic vs. real images), the depth cues can
overcome the loss of accuracy due to domain changes.
Poggi et al. [121] propose a strategy that enhances or
dampens feature activations in a neural network to mod-
ulate its predictions. This is accomplished by centering a
Gaussian function on each depth value provided by the
sparse cues and modulating features that have a strong rela-
tionship with the output according to the Gaussian function.
These features come, respectively for 2D and 3D networks,
from correlation scores or features concatenation/difference,
as discussed in Section 4.2 and Section 4.3. This technique
can be applied during both training and testing to greatly
reduce the effects of domain shifts.
7
MONOCULAR
DEPTH
ESTIMATION
THROUGH
STEREO SUPERVISION
In this section, we move our focus to a new and exciting
research trend: depth estimation from a single image, for
which the synergy between stereo and deep learning re-
cently allowed for results unimaginable just a few years
ago. In monocular depth estimation, the goal is to learn a
non-linear mapping between a single RGB image and its
corresponding depth map. Even though this task comes
natural to humans, it is an ill-posed problem, since a sin-
gle 2D image might originate from an inﬁnite number of
different 3D scenes. However, unlike multi-view setups,
a single-image depth estimation system does not require
any additional equipment, making it applicable in countless
scenarios. Early supervised learning approaches [122], [123],
[124], [125], [126] have been quite successful in this task.
However, such models typically require vast amounts of
pixel-wise, ground truth training annotations which are
very difﬁcult to obtain, and thus suffer from the limitations
of end-to-end stereo approaches analyzed in Section 4.1.
More recent self-supervised strategies cast depth estima-
tion as a view-synthesis problem by introducing a photo-
metric reconstruction loss to avoid the need for expensive
ground truth depth annotations. These methods received a
lot of attention since they were able to take advantage of
existing, or easy-to-collect, large datasets comprising either
stereo pairs or monocular videos.
As opposed to multi-
frame visual odometry, approaches based on stereo images
do not suffer from scale ambiguity due to the known
camera baseline. Based on this, inferring depth without
scale ambiguity results feasible even using a single RGB
image as input, given the same camera at training and test
time. This highlights once more the synergy between stereo
and deep learning when dealing with depth estimation. In
addition, with the evolution of this research trend more su-
pervisory signals have been introduced, ranging from clever
usage of the image reprojection principle to the adoption
of distillation paradigms aimed at obtaining stronger loss
terms. These techniques have greatly shrunk the gap with
supervised approaches in terms of accuracy.
Geometry to the Rescue [3]. This work is the ﬁrst to
estimate depth from a single image using two images of
a stereo pair, referred to as source IL and target IR, for
training. A coarse-to-ﬁne end-to-end convolutional neural
network is trained to perform novel view synthesis, mini-
mizing the photometric difference between the input image
IS and a reconstructed one IW . The proposed architecture
infers scaled inverse depth (i.e. disparity) from the source
image IS, which is then used to synthesize the target image
Iw adhering to epipolar constraints.
MonoDepth [127]. Other researchers follow the above
seminal approach with a wide range of solutions and techni-
cal contributions. MonoDepth is an encoder-decoder archi-
tecture performing single image depth estimation in a self-
supervised manner. Its main characteristics include i) a new
training loss enforcing consistency between the predicted
inverse depth maps aligned with each camera view, ii)
the use of a fully sub-differentiable training loss based on
the existing bilinear sampling strategy [108], iii) a robust
appearance reconstruction loss, combination of an L1 term
and a simpliﬁed single scale SSIM [128] loss that compares
back-warped images with their real counterparts and iv)
a post-processing step to soften artifacts near occlusions,
requiring two forward passes at test time.
AsiANet [129].
Most deep networks share the same
architectural design, consisting of an encoder-decoder struc-
ture based on U-Net and various encoders, with VGG and
ResNet being the most popular. In contrast, Yusiong et al.
develop a framework dubbed Autoencoders in Autoencoders
network (AsiANet) by stacking multiple autoencoders in a
multi-scale setting. Speciﬁcally, the authors employ a unique
Inception-like pooling module, based on fractional max-
pooling in the encoding part and multi-scale cascaded au-
toencoders in the decoder. This design beneﬁts from multi-
scale features when upsampling the output of the encoder
taking into account local and global cues.
3Net [130]. Despite the surprising effectiveness of stereo
supervision, it cannot handle occlusions during training,
leading monocular networks to generate artifacts in these
regions. To overcome this, Poggi et al. design 3Net and
supervise it by assuming three horizontally aligned images,
learning to estimate two depth maps for the central frame
supervised respectively by the remaining two. These two
maps show occlusions in specular regions that are com-
pensated by combining them. Due to the lack of trinocular
datasets, 3Net employs an interleaved training strategy and
a custom architecture, designed to simulate a trinocular
setting based on conventional binocular inputs.
SuperDepth [138]. Most of the architectures for monocu-
lar depth estimation described so far are trained using low-
resolution images, due to memory constraints, and employ
photometric losses. As a consequence, this forced design
choice limits the attainable depth accuracy. To address this,
Pillai et al. introduce a deep neural network relying on

15
Method
S
V
P
A GT
F
CS E2E
Res
Abs Rel (↓) Sq Rel (↓) RMSE (↓) RMSE log (↓) δ < 1.25 (↑) δ < 1.252 (↑) δ < 1.253 (↑)
Eigen split [131] - 697 images (maximum depth: 80m)
SfMLearner [132]
✓
✓
✓
416 × 128
0.198
1.836
6.565
0.275
0.718
0.901
0.960
Monodepth2 [133] †
✓
✓
1024 × 320
0.115
0.903
4.863
0.193
0.877
0.959
0.981
Geo. to the Rescue [3]
✓
✓
608 × 176
0.152
1.226
5.849
0.246
0.784
0.921
0.967
Monodepth-R50 [127]
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.114
0.898
4.935
0.206
0.861
0.949
0.976
AsiANet [129]
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.128
1.161
5.470
0.213
0.858
0.947
0.974
3Net-R50 [130]
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.111
0.849
4.822
0.202
0.865
0.952
0.978
MonoGAN-VGG [134]
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.118
0.908
4.978
0.210
0.855
0.948
0.976
CRF-DGAN [135]
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.135
1.182
5.582
0.235
0.828
0.933
0.967
StrAT [136]
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.128
1.019
5.403
0.227
0.827
0.935
0.971
PyD-Net [137]
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.146
1.291
5.907
0.245
0.801
0.926
0.967
SuperDepth [138]
✓
✓
1024 × 384
0.112
0.875
4.958
0.207
0.852
0.947
0.977
Reﬁne and Distill [139]
✓
512 × 256
0.098
0.831
4.656
0.202
0.882
0.948
0.973
Monodepth2 [133] †
✓✓
✓
1024 × 320
0.106
0.806
4.630
0.193
0.876
0.958
0.980
Zhan [140]
✓✓
✓
608 × 160
0.135
1.132
5.585
0.229
0.820
0.933
0.971
EPC++ [141]
✓
832 × 256
0.127
0.936
5.008
0.209
0.841
0.946
0.979
DVSO [142]
✓✓✓
512 × 256
0.097
0.734
4.442
0.187
0.888
0.958
0.980
monoResMatch [113]
✓
✓
✓
✓
1280 × 384
0.096
0.673
4.351
0.184
0.890
0.961
0.981
Depth-Hints [143] †
✓
✓
✓
1024 × 320
0.096
0.710
4.393
0.185
0.890
0.962
0.981
Kuznietsov [144] †
✓
✓
✓
621 × 187
0.113
0.741
4.621
0.189
0.862
0.960
0.986
SVS [145]
✓
✓
✓
640 × 192
0.094
0.626
4.252
0.177
0.891
0.965
0.984
Cross-domain [146]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.096
0.641
4.095
0.168
0.892
0.967
0.986
KITTI 2015 split - 40 images
Monodepth-R50 [127]
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.159
2.411
6.822
0.239
0.830
0.930
0.967
SemMonodepth-R50 [147] ✓
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.143
2.161
6.526
0.222
0.850
0.939
0.972
KITTI odometry split - 8691 images
Monodepth-R50 [127]
✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.108
0.679
4.123
0.194
0.868
0.952
0.978
VOMonodepth-R50 [148]
✓✓✓
✓
✓
512 × 256
0.091
0.548
3.690
0.181
0.892
0.956
0.979
TABLE 6
Quantitative evaluation on the KITTI dataset [12], Eigen test split [131]. †indicates feature extractors pre-trained on ImageNet [149]. S: Stereo,
V: Video, P: Proxy, A: Additional information, GT: Ground Truth, F: Freiburg SceneFlow, CS: Cityscapes, E2E: End-to-End, Res: Resolution.
techniques typically used for super-resolution. In particular,
they show that by simply increasing the input image reso-
lution, depth estimation signiﬁcantly improves accordingly.
Then, taking as reference the MonoDepth [94] architecture,
SuperDepth obtains much better results by incorporating
sub-pixel convolutional layers to super-resolve inverse depth
maps at each scale (typically up-sampled by means of
standard deconvolutions or resize-convolution sequences) and
a differentiable ﬂip-augmentation layer, in order to mitigate
occlusion artifacts in an end-to-end fashion.
SVS [145]. Although it is not a self-supervised method-
ology, SVS is the very ﬁrst attempt to mimic stereo matching
for monocular depth estimation. To this aim, processing
occurs in two stages exploiting two distinct architectures.
A ﬁrst view synthesis network, based on Deep3D [150], is in
charge of generating a synthetic right view selecting pixels
from the input image IL. Then, a second depth-supervised
network based on the DispNet-C structure [11] processes
the left and the synthesized right images to estimate the
ﬁnal depth map, achieving state-of-the-art results.
Cross-domain [146]. Although affected by the domain-
shift curse, as discussed in Section 6, deep stereo networks
are in general more accurate than monocular ones across
domains because they reason about geometry. Following
this rationale, Guo et al. generate distilled depth labels, em-
ploying stereo networks trained on large synthetic datasets
with ground truth and optionally ﬁne-tuned on realistic
ones. Such distilled knowledge provides dense supervision
for a monocular network, resulting much more effective
than warping strategies.
MonoResMatch [113]. Although distilling knowledge
from stereo networks shows promise [146], it requires a two-
stage training protocol and is affected by domain-shifts. To
overcome both, Tosi et al. propose respectively i) a novel ar-
chitecture, jointly estimating a virtual view and performing
stereo matching between it and the real image, and ii) to
leverage a traditional stereo algorithm agnostic to domain,
such as SGM, for distillation. As consequence, no synthetic
data is required at all and a single, end-to-end training is
carried out to achieve state-of-the-art accuracy.
Reﬁne and Distill [139]. Following distillation ap-
proaches, Pilzer et al. propose a framework for self-
supervised depth estimation comprising two collaborative
architectures. A student network is in charge of synthesizing
IW as opposite view to the input image (counter-intuitively,
IR in this framework). Then, a backward cycle network
attempts to re-synthesize the original input image taking IW
as input. A teacher network takes advantage of the inconsis-
tencies between input image and IW to infer a reﬁned depth
map. The last step exploits knowledge distillation, in order
to transfer information from teacher to student and thus, to
improve the student network.
Depth-Hints [143]. By studying the training signals en-
abled by reprojection, Watson et al. show that ﬁnding the
optimal depth value is often not trivial, especially in regions
of the images where the photometric loss is ambiguous and
multiple depth candidates appear valid. In order to alleviate
these problems, they propose to rely on external depth hints
obtained from off-the-shelf stereo algorithms. Depth hints are
trusted only when showing to be more reliable than image
reprojection, thus providing complementary information
during the training phase.
MonoGAN [134]. With the advent of Generative Adver-
sarial Networks (GANs), it became possible to model distri-
butions of complex data, enabling new capabilities in deep
image synthesis for instance. Aleotti et al. use a generator
network based on MonoDepth to infer depth from IL and
synthesize the warped target image IW . A discriminator
network is then used to distinguish between fake IW and real
IR. Thus, the discriminator pushes the generator to obtain
more realistic IW and, thus, better depth estimates.
StrAT [136]. Following the success of GANs, this work

16
addresses monocular depth estimation by proposing a novel
Structured Adversarial Training (StrAT) strategy. Speciﬁcally,
a generator model tries to generate realistic stereo pairs,
which have to be discriminated from the real ones. By incre-
mentally varying baselines, the authors show that multiple
samples with varying degrees of difﬁculty can be generated
to guide the training process of the entire architecture.
CRF-DGAN [135]. By studying in depth the previous
GAN-based approaches, Puscas et al. propose a dual gener-
ative adversarial network, coupled with a structured Condi-
tional Random Field (CRF), for depth prediction. In partic-
ular, two generative models infer different, complementary,
disparity maps that are then fused and further processed
with the outputs of two discriminative networks using the
CRF. By doing so, the entire architecture establishes strong
mutual constraints between each component in order to
facilitate network optimization, and thus depth generation.
PyDNet [137]. Although previous works mostly focus
on accuracy, real-time and low-power constraints are often
also crucial in real applications. PyDNet represents the ﬁrst
attempt to make monocular depth estimation feasible on
standard CPUs and embedded devices with limited mem-
ory capacity. This goal is achieved thanks to a modular
design, based on a pyramidal feature extractor and a series of
shallow depth decoders. The network infers depth maps from
1
64 to half of the input resolution and allows for early-stop at
intermediate resolutions, in case of strict timing constraints.
PyDNet provides results comparable to standard networks
[94] but considerably faster, achieving high fame rate for
depth inference on embedded devices [137] and on low-
power platforms [151].
Semi-Supervised Monocular Depth [144]. Arguing that
typical depth sensors, such as 3D laser scanners, have spe-
ciﬁc noise characteristics and generate measurements much
sparser than images, while self-supervised strategies based
on stereo images struggle in texture-less regions, Kuznietsov
et al. propose a semi-supervised methodology to incorporate
the best of both worlds. Speciﬁcally, the network exploits 3D
laser measurements in supervised fashion and, at the same
time, stereo pairs using a direct image alignment loss based
on photometric consistency.
Semantic MonoDepth [152]. Semantic segmentation has
witnessed enormous progress due to machine learning.
Therefore, learning to infer both semantics and depth from
a single image exploiting the synergies of the two is of
particular interest. For this purpose, Ramirez et al. unite self-
supervised monocular depth estimation and supervised se-
mantic segmentation by introducing i) a shared encoder and
task-speciﬁc decoders trained for joint optimization and ii)
a cross-domain discontinuity loss to enforce spatial proximity
between depth discontinuities and semantic contours.
Deep Feature Reconstruction [140]. An alternative path
consists into learning single image depth estimation from
monocular sequences, captured by a moving camera and
assuming the scene to be static [132]. In this case, the pose
between frames is not known, thus estimated depth suffers
from scale ambiguity. Zhan et al. propose to tackle this
latter problem by using stereo sequences at training time. By
imposing both spatial and temporal constraints, scene depth
and camera motion are in a common real-world scale.
Monodepth2 [133]. Most of the research on monocular
depth estimation focused on complex architectures or spe-
ciﬁc loss functions. Godard et al. show that careful design
choices in conjunction with light-weight models sufﬁce to
obtain state-of-the-art results. Considering joint supervision
from a monocular sequence and a stereo pair, the authors
propose i) a minimum reprojection loss to effectively handle
occlusions between consecutive frames, ii) a multi-scale
photometric loss, upsampling low-resolution intermediate
depth maps to full resolution for better supervision and iii)
an auto-masking loss to ignore pixels that violate camera
motion assumptions during the training phase.
EPC++ [141], [153]. More authors combined supervision
from sequences with stereo setup. Luo et al. propose EPC++
(Every Pixel Counts++), taking as input two images of a
monocular sequence and adopting three task-speciﬁc net-
works to predict camera motion, depth and optical ﬂow.
A further component, named holistic 3D motion parser
(HMP), is in charge of recovering a per-pixel 3D motion for
both rigid background and moving objects.
DVSO [142]. To reduce the limitations of traditional,
monocular visual-odometry, which is typically prone to
scale drift issues due to the unknown absolute metric scale,
Yang et al. incorporate dense monocular depth prediction
into a monocular odometry pipeline. To this aim, the authors
design a novel monocular network architecture called Stack-
Net and built by stacking two-subnetworks, respectively
SimpleNet, that learns to infer an initial depth estimate in a
ﬁrst training phase, and ReﬁneNet, that reﬁnes it in a second
training phase. Photometric consistency losses are combined
with proxy labels, sourced from a stereo odometry algo-
rithm, in order to supervises the framework.
VOMonodepth [148]. Since monocular sequences are
often available during deployment too, it seems reasonable
to feed a monocular network with sparse 3D cues obtained
with a traditional Visual Odometry (VO) algorithm. An-
draghetti et al. feed a monocular network with VO priors to
facilitate the training process and the accuracy for both com-
plex and compact models. In contrast to strategies described
so far leveraging visual odometry, it is the only solution for
which external hints are available at test time as well.
7.1
Experimental comparison
We now report a comparison of the monocular networks
reviewed so far. To this aim, we collect performance mea-
sured on the KITTI raw dataset [7], evaluating a set of
metrics proposed by Eigen et al. [131]: four error metrics, the
lower the better, respectively Absolute Relative error (Abs
Rel), Squared Relative error (Sq Rel), Root Mean Squared
Error (RMSE) and scale-invariant RMSE (RMSE log); and
three accuracy scores, obtained by counting the fraction of
total pixels for which δ, that is the maximum between the
predicted depth to ground truth and the ground truth to
depth ratios, is lower than 1.25, 1.252 and 1.253, the higher
the better. Table 6 collects results of different models on
different splits of KITTI, taken from the original papers.
For each method, we indicate the kind of supervision (S:
Stereo, V: Video sequence, P: Proxy labels, A: Additional,
GT: Ground Truth), additional datasets used for training (F:
Freiburg SceneFlow, CS: CityScapes), the resolution adopted
at training/testing time (Res) and the capability of the
network to be trained in an end-to-end manner (E2E).

17
2017
2018
2019
Fig. 6. Evolution of stereo-supervised monocular depth estimation, showing results achieved through 2017 [94], 2018 [130] and 2019 [113].
Most current approaches adopt the Eigen split [131] of
KITTI, for which 697 images with “ground truth” depth
acquired with a Velodyne sensor are used for testing and
22600 for training. Methods evaluated on different splits
[147], [148] are reported on bottom and compared with
their baselines [94]. Depth maps are evaluated within the
ﬁrst 80 meters using the Garg crop [3]. In this evaluation,
we also consider methodologies trained only on monocular
sequences [132], [133] in order to highlight the existing
gap with stereo supervision and to point out how such
a margin is progressively shrinking. We can observe how,
in general, using proxy labels from stereo pairs or stereo
sequences at training time as in [113], [139], [142] allows
to notably improve the accuracy compared to other self-
supervised strategies, obtaining comparable or better results
than supervised and semi-supervised networks [144], [145],
[146]. Moreover, image resolution and the pre-training pro-
cess play a key role as well [113], [133], [138]. Finally, both
semantic [147] and VO [148] priors are indeed beneﬁcial to
monocular depth estimation.
Figure 6 highlights the notable progress in monocular
depth estimation, deploying stereo supervision, achieved in
the past three years.
8
DISCUSSION
In this section, we summarize the achievements of the
recent methods reviewed in this paper and also identify
the remaining open challenges and possible future research
directions. We identify four main take-home messages:
•
While seminal learning-based approaches aimed at
replacing single steps of the stereo pipeline showed
great potential, the greatest turning-point was due
to the change from hand-crafted pipelines to end-
to-end networks. This paradigm is nowadays dom-
inant and represents the preferred choice for both
experts and new researchers, whereas the popularity
of hand-crafted pipelines is rapidly fading.
•
Nevertheless, conventional knowledge about stereo
survived this paradigm shift and has not gone ex-
tinct. Indeed, speciﬁc design choices such as the
correlation layer [11] or 3D cost aggregation [73] are
inspired by decades of research on stereo and play a
key role in many deep networks.
•
The main shortcomings introduced by end-to-end
models concern the need for large amounts of
ground truth annotated samples, that limits their
seamless deployment in-the-wild. Self-supervised or
adaptation techniques (Section 6.1) are emerging as
promising strategies to address the problem, paving
the way for brand new research opportunities.
•
Stereo geometry turned out to also be a precious
source of self-supervision for frameworks estimating
depth from a single image [3], [94], by dramatically
reducing the overhead required to collect training
samples and rapidly contributing to the spread and
development of this research thrust.
Nevertheless, two major challenges remain in this ﬁeld:
i) generalization across different domains and ii) applicabil-
ity on high-resolution images. In particular, current results
on Middlebury 2014 [8] highlight these open problems.
Although a few works have started addressing the former
by means of continuous adaptation [60] and the latter by
careful design choices [88], in our opinion these will be the
major directions of development in the upcoming years.
9
CONCLUSION
We have presented a comprehensive survey of recent ad-
vances in depth estimation from images leveraging the syn-
ergies between binocular stereo and data-driven, learning-
based methods. Reviewing the literature reveals that the
relationship is bidirectional and new machine learning ap-
proaches had to be developed to address depth estimation.
While research is ongoing and voluminous, we believe that
this survey will be valuable for researchers entering this
ﬁeld, as well as for experts.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Scharstein and R. Szeliski, “A taxonomy and evaluation
of dense two-frame stereo correspondence algorithms,” IJCV,
vol. 47, no. 1-3, pp. 7–42, 2002.
[2]
Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, vol.
521, no. 7553, p. 436, 2015.
[3]
R. Garg, V. K. BG, G. Carneiro, and I. Reid, “Unsupervised CNN
for single view depth estimation: Geometry to the rescue,” in
ECCV.
Springer, 2016, pp. 740–756.
[4]
M. Brown, D. Burschka, and G. Hager, “Advances in computa-
tional stereo,” PAMI, vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 993–1008, 2003.
[5]
D. Scharstein and R. Szeliski, “High-accuracy stereo depth maps
using structured light,” in CVPR, 2003.
[6]
H. Hirschm¨uller and D. Scharstein, “Evaluation of cost functions
for stereo matching,” in CVPR, 2007.
[7]
A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for au-
tonomous driving? The KITTI vision benchmark suite,” in CVPR,
2012.
[8]
D. Scharstein, H. Hirschm¨uller, Y. Kitajima, G. Krathwohl,
N. Neˇsi´c, X. Wang, and P. Westling, “High-resolution stereo
datasets with subpixel-accurate ground truth,” in German Con-
ference on Pattern Recognition, 2014, pp. 31–42.
[9]
M. Menze and A. Geiger, “Object scene ﬂow for autonomous
vehicles,” in CVPR, 2015, pp. 3061–3070.
[10]
T. Sch¨ops, J. L. Sch¨onberger, S. Galliani, T. Sattler, K. Schindler,
M. Pollefeys, and A. Geiger, “A multi-view stereo benchmark
with high-resolution images and multi-camera videos,” in CVPR,
2017, pp. 3260–3269.
[11]
N. Mayer, E. Ilg, P. Hausser, P. Fischer, D. Cremers, A. Dosovit-
skiy, and T. Brox, “A large dataset to train convolutional networks
for disparity, optical ﬂow, and scene ﬂow estimation,” in CVPR,
2016, pp. 4040–4048.
[12]
A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets
robotics: The kitti dataset,” IJRR, vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1231–1237,
2013.

18
[13]
N. Mayer, E. Ilg, P. Fischer, C. Hazirbas, D. Cremers, A. Dosovit-
skiy, and T. Brox, “What makes good synthetic training data for
learning disparity and optical ﬂow estimation?” IJCV, vol. 126,
no. 9, pp. 942–960, 2018.
[14]
A. X. Chang, T. Funkhouser, L. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q. Huang,
Z. Li, S. Savarese, M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su et al., “ShapeNet:
An
information-rich
3d
model
repository,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
[15]
D. J. Butler, J. Wulff, G. B. Stanley, and M. J. Black, “A naturalistic
open source movie for optical ﬂow evaluation,” in European Conf.
on Computer Vision (ECCV), ser. Part IV, LNCS 7577, A. Fitzgibbon
et al. (Eds.), Ed.
Springer-Verlag, Oct. 2012, pp. 611–625.
[16]
E. Ilg, T. Saikia, M. Keuper, and T. Brox, “Occlusions, motion and
depth boundaries with a generic network for disparity, optical
ﬂow or scene ﬂow estimation,” in ECCV, 2018.
[17]
T. Saikia, Y. Marrakchi, A. Zela, F. Hutter, and T. Brox, “Autodisp-
net: Improving disparity estimation with automl,” in ICCV, 2019.
[18]
A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun,
“CARLA: An open urban driving simulator,” in Proceedings of the
1st Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2017, pp. 1–16.
[19]
A. Tonioni, O. Rahnama, T. Joy, L. Di Stefano, A. Thalaiyasingam,
and P. Torr, “Learning to adapt for stereo,” in CVPR, 2019.
[20]
W. Maddern, G. Pascoe, C. Linegar, and P. Newman, “1 Year,
1000km: The Oxford RobotCar Dataset,” IJRR, vol. 36, no. 1, pp.
3–15, 2017.
[21]
P. Wang, X. Huang, X. Cheng, D. Zhou, Q. Geng, and R. Yang,
“The ApolloScape open dataset for autonomous driving and its
application,” PAMI, 2019.
[22]
G. Yang, X. Song, C. Huang, Z. Deng, J. Shi, and B. Zhou,
“DrivingStereo: A large-scale dataset for stereo matching in au-
tonomous driving scenarios,” in CVPR, 2019.
[23]
P. Sun, H. Kretzschmar, X. Dotiwalla, A. Chouard, V. Patnaik,
P. Tsui, J. Guo, Y. Zhou, Y. Chai, B. Caine et al., “Scalability in
perception for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.04838, 2019.
[24]
M.-F. Chang, J. W. Lambert, P. Sangkloy, J. Singh, S. Bak, A. Hart-
nett, D. Wang, P. Carr, S. Lucey, D. Ramanan, and J. Hays,
“Argoverse: 3d tracking and forecasting with rich maps,” in
CVPR, 2019.
[25]
R. Kesten, M. Usman, J. Houston, T. Pandya, K. Nadhamuni,
A. Ferreira, M. Yuan, B. Low, A. Jain, P. Ondruska, S. Omari,
S. Shah, A. Kulkarni, A. Kazakova, C. Tao, L. Platinsky,
W. Jiang, and V. Shet, “Lyft Level 5 AV Dataset 2019,” url-
https://level5.lyft.com/dataset/, 2019.
[26]
H. Hirschm¨uller, “Stereo processing by semiglobal matching and
mutual information,” PAMI, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 328–341, 2008.
[27]
J. ˇZbontar and Y. LeCun, “Stereo matching by training a convo-
lutional neural network to compare image patches.” Journal of
Machine Learning Research, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 2287–2318, 2016.
[28]
R. Zabih and J. Woodﬁll, “Non-parametric local transforms for
computing visual correspondence,” in ECCV, 1994, pp. 151–158.
[29]
X. Mei, X. Sun, M. Zhou, S. Jiao, H. Wang, and X. Zhang,
“On building an accurate stereo matching system on graphics
hardware,” in ICCV Workshops, 2011, pp. 467–474.
[30]
K. Zhang, J. Lu, and G. Lafruit, “Cross-based local stereo match-
ing using orthogonal integral images,” IEEE Transactions on Cir-
cuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 1073–1079,
2009.
[31]
Z. Chen, X. Sun, L. Wang, Y. Yu, and C. Huang, “A deep visual
correspondence embedding model for stereo matching costs,” in
ICCV, 2015, pp. 972–980.
[32]
W. Luo, A. G. Schwing, and R. Urtasun, “Efﬁcient deep learning
for stereo matching,” in CVPR, 2016, pp. 5695–5703.
[33]
H. Park and K. M. Lee, “Look wider to match image patches with
convolutional neural networks,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters,
vol. 24, no. 12, pp. 1788–1792, 2017.
[34]
R. Schuster, O. Wasenmuller, C. Unger, and D. Stricker, “SDC
- stacked dilated convolution: A uniﬁed descriptor network for
dense matching tasks,” in CVPR, 2019.
[35]
F. Zhang and B. W. Wah, “Fundamental principles on learning
new features for effective dense matching,” TIP, 2017.
[36]
K. Batsos, C. Cai, and P. Mordohai, “CBMV: A coalesced bidirec-
tional matching volume for disparity estimation,” in CVPR, 2018,
pp. 2060–2069.
[37]
S. Tulyakov, A. Ivanov, and F. Fleuret, “Weakly supervised learn-
ing of deep metrics for stereo reconstruction,” in ICCV, 2017.
[38]
A. Spyropoulos, N. Komodakis, and P. Mordohai, “Learning to
detect ground control points for improving the accuracy of stereo
matching,” in CVPR, 2014, pp. 1621–1628.
[39]
A. Spyropoulos and P. Mordohai, “Correctness prediction, accu-
racy improvement and generalization of stereo matching using
supervised learning,” IJCV, vol. 118, no. 3, pp. 300–318, 2016.
[40]
N. Komodakis, G. Tziritas, and N. Paragios, “Fast, approximately
optimal solutions for single and dynamic MRFs,” in CVPR, 2007.
[41]
M.-G. Park and K.-J. Yoon, “Leveraging stereo matching with
learning-based conﬁdence measures,” in CVPR, 2015, pp. 101–
109.
[42]
——, “Learning and selecting conﬁdence measures for robust
stereo matching,” PAMI, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1397–1411, 2018.
[43]
M. Poggi and S. Mattoccia, “Learning a general-purpose conﬁ-
dence measure based on O(1) features and a smarter aggregation
strategy for semi global matching,” in 3DV, 2016, pp. 509–518.
[44]
M. Poggi, F. Tosi, and S. Mattoccia, “Learning a conﬁdence
measure in the disparity domain from O(1) features,” CVIU, vol.
193, p. 102905, 2020.
[45]
A. Seki and M. Pollefeys, “Patch based conﬁdence prediction for
dense disparity map.” in BMVC, 2016, pp. 23.1–23.13.
[46]
——, “SGM-Nets: Semi-global matching with neural networks,”
in CVPR, 2017, pp. 231–240.
[47]
J. L. Sch¨onberger, S. N. Sinha, and M. Pollefeys, “Learning to fuse
proposals from multiple scanline optimizations in semi-global
matching,” in ECCV, 2018, pp. 739–755.
[48]
A. Shaked and L. Wolf, “Improved stereo matching with constant
highway networks and reﬂective conﬁdence learning,” in CVPR,
2017, pp. 4641–4650.
[49]
S. Gidaris and N. Komodakis, “Detect, replace, reﬁne: Deep
structured prediction for pixel wise labeling,” in CVPR, 2017, pp.
5248–5257.
[50]
X. Ye, J. Li, H. Wang, H. Huang, and X. Zhang, “Efﬁcient stereo
matching leveraging deep local and context information,” IEEE
Access, vol. 5, pp. 18 745–18 755, 2017.
[51]
K. Batsos and P. Mordohai, “RecResNet: A recurrent residual
CNN architecture for disparity map enhancement,” in 3DV, 2018,
pp. 238–247.
[52]
Z. Jie, P. Wang, Y. Ling, B. Zhao, Y. Wei, J. Feng, and W. Liu,
“Left-right comparative recurrent model for stereo matching,” in
CVPR, 2018.
[53]
P. Kn¨obelreiter and T. Pock, “Learned collaborative stereo reﬁne-
ment,” in German Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 3–17.
[54]
Z. Jie, P. Wang, Y. Ling, B. Zhao, Y. Wei, J. Feng, and W. Liu,
“Left-right comparative recurrent model for stereo matching,” in
CVPR, 2018, pp. 3838–3846.
[55]
L.-C. Chen, Y. Zhu, G. Papandreou, F. Schroff, and H. Adam,
“Encoder-decoder with atrous separable convolution for seman-
tic image segmentation,” in ECCV, 2018.
[56]
A. Dosovitskiy, P. Fischer, E. Ilg, P. Hausser, C. Hazirbas,
V. Golkov, P. Van Der Smagt, D. Cremers, and T. Brox, “Flownet:
Learning optical ﬂow with convolutional networks,” in ICCV,
2015, pp. 2758–2766.
[57]
H. Fu, M. Gong, C. Wang, K. Batmanghelich, and D. Tao, “Deep
ordinal regression network for monocular depth estimation,” in
CVPR, 2018.
[58]
O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-Net: Convolutional
networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted In-
tervention, 2015, pp. 234–241.
[59]
Z. Yin, T. Darrell, and F. Yu, “Hierarchical discrete distribution
decomposition for match density estimation,” in CVPR, 2019, pp.
6044–6053.
[60]
A. Tonioni, F. Tosi, M. Poggi, S. Mattoccia, and L. Di Stefano,
“Real-time self-adaptive deep stereo,” in CVPR, June 2019.
[61]
P. Kn¨obelreiter, C. Reinbacher, A. Shekhovtsov, and T. Pock,
“End-to-end training of hybrid CNN-CRF models for stereo,” in
CVPR, 2017, pp. 2339–2348.
[62]
J. Pang, W. Sun, J. S. Ren, C. Yang, and Q. Yan, “Cascade residual
learning: A two-stage convolutional neural network for stereo
matching,” in ICCV, 2017, pp. 887–895.
[63]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for
image recognition,” in CVPR, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[64]
Z. Liang, Y. Feng, Y. Guo, H. Liu, W. Chen, L. Qiao, L. Zhou,
and J. Zhang, “Learning for disparity estimation through feature
constancy,” in CVPR, 2018, pp. 2811–2820.

19
[65]
H. Liu, K. Simonyan, and Y. Yang, “DARTS: Differentiable archi-
tecture search,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[66]
G. Yang, H. Zhao, J. Shi, Z. Deng, and J. Jia, “SegStereo: Exploiting
semantic information for disparity estimation,” in ECCV, 2018,
pp. 636–651.
[67]
S. Ruder, “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05098, 2017.
[68]
X. Song, X. Zhao, H. Hu, and L. Fang, “EdgeStereo: A context
integrated residual pyramid network for stereo matching,” in
ACCV, 2018.
[69]
X. Song, X. Zhao, L. Fang, H. Hu, and Y. Yu, “Edgestereo: An
effective multi-task learning network for stereo matching and
edge detection,” International Journal of Computer Vision, pp. 1–
21, 2020.
[70]
W. Zhan, X. Ou, Y. Yang, and L. Chen, “DSNet: Joint learning for
scene segmentation and disparity estimation,” in ICRA, 2019, pp.
2946–2952.
[71]
H. Jiang, D. Sun, V. Jampani, Z. Lv, E. Learned-Miller, and
J. Kautz, “Sense: A shared encoder network for scene-ﬂow es-
timation,” in The IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), October 2019.
[72]
C. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Shen, and J. Jia, “Unsupervised learning
of stereo matching,” in ICCV, 2017, pp. 1567–1575.
[73]
A. Kendall, H. Martirosyan, S. Dasgupta, P. Henry, R. Kennedy,
A. Bachrach, and A. Bry, “End-to-end learning of geometry and
context for deep stereo regression,” in ICCV, 2017, pp. 66–75.
[74]
L. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Wu, and Y. Jia, “Deep stereo matching with
explicit cost aggregation sub-architecture,” in AAAI, 2018.
[75]
J.-R. Chang and Y.-S. Chen, “Pyramid stereo matching network,”
in CVPR, 2018, pp. 5410–5418.
[76]
K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Spatial pyramid pooling
in deep convolutional networks for visual recognition,” PAMI,
vol. 37, no. 9, pp. 1904–1916, 2015.
[77]
G.-Y. Nie, M.-M. Cheng, Y. Liu, Z. Liang, D.-P. Fan, Y. Liu,
and Y. Wang, “Multi-level context ultra-aggregation for stereo
matching,” in CVPR, 2019.
[78]
X. Cheng, P. Wang, and R. Yang, “Learning depth with convolu-
tional spatial propagation network,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, pp. 1–1, 2019.
[79]
F. Zhang, V. Prisacariu, R. Yang, and P. H. Torr, “GA-Net: Guided
aggregation net for end-to-end stereo matching,” in CVPR, 2019.
[80]
L. De-Maeztu, S. Mattoccia, A. Villanueva, and R. Cabeza, “Lin-
ear stereo matching,” in ICCV, 2011, pp. 1708–1715.
[81]
A. Hosni, C. Rhemann, M. Bleyer, C. Rother, and M. Gelautz,
“Fast cost-volume ﬁltering for visual correspondence and be-
yond,” PAMI, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 504–511, 2012.
[82]
R. Chabra, J. Straub, C. Sweeney, R. Newcombe, and H. Fuchs,
“StereoDRNet: Dilated Residual StereoNet,” in CVPR, 2019.
[83]
C.-W. Xie, H.-Y. Zhou, and J. Wu, “Vortex pooling: Improving
context representation in semantic segmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1804.06242, 2018.
[84]
S. Tulyakov, A. Ivanov, and F. Fleuret, “Practical deep stereo
(PDS): Toward applications-friendly deep stereo matching,” in
NeurIPS, 2018, pp. 5871–5881.
[85]
S. Khamis, S. Fanello, C. Rhemann, A. Kowdle, J. Valentin, and
S. Izadi, “StereoNet: Guided hierarchical reﬁnement for real-time
edge-aware depth prediction,” in ECCV, 2018, pp. 573–590.
[86]
Y. Wang, Z. Lai, G. Huang, B. H. Wang, L. van der Maaten,
M. Campbell, and K. Q. Weinberger, “Anytime stereo image
depth estimation on mobile devices,” in ICRA, 2019.
[87]
S. Liu, S. De Mello, J. Gu, G. Zhong, M.-H. Yang, and J. Kautz,
“Learning afﬁnity via spatial propagation networks,” in NeurIPS,
2017, pp. 1520–1530.
[88]
G. Yang, J. Manela, M. Happold, and D. Ramanan, “Hierarchical
deep stereo matching on high-resolution images,” in CVPR, 2019.
[89]
X. Guo, K. Yang, W. Yang, X. Wang, and H. Li, “Group-wise
correlation stereo network,” in CVPR, 2019.
[90]
Z. Wu, X. Wu, X. Zhang, S. Wang, and L. Ju, “Semantic stereo
matching with pyramid cost volumes,” in ICCV, 2019.
[91]
S. Duggal, S. Wang, W.-C. Ma, R. Hu, and R. Urtasun, “Deep-
pruner: Learning efﬁcient stereo matching via differentiable
patchmatch,” in ICCV, 2019.
[92]
A. Li and Z. Yuan, “Occlusion aware stereo matching via cooper-
ative unsupervised learning,” in ACCV, 2018, pp. 197–213.
[93]
C. Barnes, E. Shechtman, A. Finkelstein, and D. B. Goldman,
“PatchMatch: A randomized correspondence algorithm for struc-
tural image editing,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 28, no. 3,
2009.
[94]
C. Godard, O. Mac Aodha, and G. J. Brostow, “Unsupervised
monocular depth estimation with left-right consistency,” in
CVPR, 2017, pp. 270–279.
[95]
F. Tosi, M. Poggi, A. Benincasa, and S. Mattoccia, “Beyond local
reasoning for stereo conﬁdence estimation with deep learning,”
in ECCV, 2018, pp. 319–334.
[96]
M. Poggi, F. Tosi, and S. Mattoccia, “Quantitative evaluation of
conﬁdence measures in a machine learning world,” in ICCV,
2017, pp. 5228–5237.
[97]
R. Haeusler, R. Nair, and D. Kondermann, “Ensemble learning
for conﬁdence measures in stereo vision,” in CVPR, 2013, pp.
305–312.
[98]
X. Hu and P. Mordohai, “A quantitative evaluation of conﬁdence
measures for stereo vision,” PAMI, vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 2121–2133,
2012.
[99]
M. Poggi and S. Mattoccia, “Learning from scratch a conﬁdence
measure.” in BMVC, 2016.
[100] ——, “Learning to predict stereo reliability enforcing local con-
sistency of conﬁdence maps,” in CVPR, 2017, pp. 2452–2461.
[101] C. Mostegel, M. Rumpler, F. Fraundorfer, and H. Bischof, “Using
self-contradiction to learn conﬁdence measures in stereo vision,”
in CVPR, 2016.
[102] F. Tosi, M. Poggi, A. Tonioni, L. Di Stefano, and S. Mattoccia,
“Learning conﬁdence measures in the wild,” in BMVC, 2017.
[103] Z. Fu and M. A. Fard, “Learning conﬁdence measures by multi-
modal convolutional neural networks,” in WACV, 2018, pp. 1321–
1330.
[104] S. Kim, D. Min, S. Kim, and K. Sohn, “Feature augmentation for
learning conﬁdence measure in stereo matching,” TIP, vol. 26,
no. 12, pp. 6019–6033, 2017.
[105] R. Gouveia, A. Spyropoulos, and P. Mordohai, “Conﬁdence esti-
mation for superpixel-based stereo matching,” in 3DV, 2015, pp.
180–188.
[106] S. Kim, D. Min, S. Kim, and K. Sohn, “Uniﬁed conﬁdence estima-
tion networks for robust stereo matching,” TIP, vol. 28, no. 3, pp.
1299–1313, 2018.
[107] S. Kim, S. Kim, D. Min, and K. Sohn, “LAF-Net: Locally adaptive
fusion networks for stereo conﬁdence estimation,” in CVPR, 2019.
[108] M. Jaderberg, K. Simonyan, and A. Zisserman, “Spatial trans-
former networks,” in NeurIPS, 2015, pp. 2017–2025.
[109] A. Kendall and Y. Gal, “What uncertainties do we need in
bayesian deep learning for computer vision?” in NeurIPS, 2017,
pp. 5574–5584.
[110] A. Kendall, Y. Gal, and R. Cipolla, “Multi-task learning using
uncertainty to weigh losses for scene geometry and semantics,”
in CVPR, 2018, pp. 7482–7491.
[111] J. Gast and S. Roth, “Lightweight probabilistic deep networks,”
in CVPR, 2018, pp. 3369–3378.
[112] M. Poggi, F. Aleotti, F. Tosi, and S. Mattoccia, “On the uncertainty
of self-supervised monocular depth estimation,” in CVPR, 2020.
[113] F. Tosi, F. Aleotti, M. Poggi, and S. Mattoccia, “Learning monoc-
ular depth estimation infusing traditional stereo knowledge,” in
CVPR, 2019.
[114] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-to-
image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,”
in ICCV, 2017.
[115] J. Hoffman, E. Tzeng, T. Park, J.-Y. Zhu, P. Isola, K. Saenko,
A. Efros, and T. Darrell, “Cycada: Cycle-consistent adversarial
domain adaptation,” in ICML, 2018, pp. 1989–1998.
[116] A. Tonioni, M. Poggi, S. Mattoccia, and L. Di Stefano, “Unsuper-
vised adaptation for deep stereo,” in ICCV, 2017, pp. 1605–1613.
[117] ——, “Unsupervised domain adaptation for depth prediction
from images,” PAMI, 2019.
[118] P. Kn¨obelreiter, C. Vogel, and T. Pock, “Self-supervised learning
for stereo reconstruction on aerial images,” in IGARSS 2018-
2018 IEEE International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 4379–4382.
[119] J. Pang, W. Sun, C. Yang, J. Ren, R. Xiao, J. Zeng, and L. Lin,
“Zoom and learn: Generalizing deep stereo matching to novel
domains,” in CVPR, 2018, pp. 2070–2079.
[120] Y. Zhong, H. Li, and Y. Dai, “Open-world stereo video matching
with deep RNN,” in ECCV, 2018, pp. 101–116.
[121] M. Poggi, D. Pallotti, F. Tosi, and S. Mattoccia, “Guided stereo
matching,” in CVPR, 2019.

20
[122] A. Saxena, M. Sun, and A. Y. Ng, “Make3d: Learning 3d scene
structure from a single still image,” PAMI, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 824–
840, 2009.
[123] L. Ladicky, J. Shi, and M. Pollefeys, “Pulling things out of
perspective,” in CVPR, 2014, pp. 89–96.
[124] F. Liu, C. Shen, G. Lin, and I. Reid, “Learning depth from sin-
gle monocular images using deep convolutional neural ﬁelds,”
PAMI, vol. 38, no. 10, pp. 2024–2039, 2016.
[125] K. Karsch, C. Liu, and S. B. Kang, “Depth transfer: Depth extrac-
tion from video using non-parametric sampling.” PAMI, vol. 36,
no. 11, pp. 2144–2158, 2014.
[126] I. Laina, C. Rupprecht, V. Belagiannis, F. Tombari, and N. Navab,
“Deeper depth prediction with fully convolutional residual net-
works,” in 3DV, 2016, pp. 239–248.
[127] C. Godard, O. Mac Aodha, and G. J. Brostow, “Unsupervised
monocular depth estimation with left-right consistency,” in
CVPR, 2017.
[128] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: From error visibility to structural similarity,”
TIP, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.
[129] J. P. Yusiong and P. Naval, “AsiANet: Autoencoders in Autoen-
coder for Unsupervised Monocular Depth Estimation,” in WACV,
2019, pp. 443–451.
[130] M. Poggi, F. Tosi, and S. Mattoccia, “Learning monocular depth
estimation with unsupervised trinocular assumptions,” in 3DV,
2018.
[131] D. Eigen, C. Puhrsch, and R. Fergus, “Depth map prediction from
a single image using a multi-scale deep network,” in NeurIPS,
2014, pp. 2366–2374.
[132] T. Zhou, M. Brown, N. Snavely, and D. G. Lowe, “Unsupervised
learning of depth and ego-motion from video,” in CVPR, 2017.
[133] C. Godard, O. Mac Aodha, and G. J. Brostow, “Digging into self-
supervised monocular depth estimation,” in ICCV, 2019.
[134] F. Aleotti, F. Tosi, M. Poggi, and S. Mattoccia, “Generative adver-
sarial networks for unsupervised monocular depth prediction,”
in ECCV Workshops, 2018.
[135] M. M. Puscas, D. Xu, A. Pilzer, and N. Sebe, “Structured coupled
generative adversarial networks for unsupervised monocular
depth estimation,” in 3DV, 2019.
[136] I. Mehta, P. Sakurikar, and P. J. Narayanan, “Structured adver-
sarial training for unsupervised monocular depth estimation,” in
3DV, 2018.
[137] M. Poggi, F. Aleotti, F. Tosi, and S. Mattoccia, “Towards real-time
unsupervised monocular depth estimation on cpu,” in IEEE/JRS
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2018.
[138] S.
Pillai,
R.
Ambrus,
and
A.
Gaidon,
“Superdepth:
Self-
supervised, super-resolved monocular depth estimation,” in
ICRA, 2019.
[139] A. Pilzer, S. Lathuiliere, N. Sebe, and E. Ricci, “Reﬁne and
distill: Exploiting cycle-inconsistency and knowledge distillation
for unsupervised monocular depth estimation.” in CVPR, 2019.
[140] H. Zhan, R. Garg, C. S. Weerasekera, K. Li, H. Agarwal, and
I. Reid, “Unsupervised learning of monocular depth estimation
and visual odometry with deep feature reconstruction,” in CVPR,
2018.
[141] C. Luo, Z. Yang, P. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Xu, R. Nevatia, and
A. Yuille, “Every pixel counts++: Joint learning of geometry and
motion with 3d holistic understanding,” PAMI, 2019.
[142] N. Yang, R. Wang, J. St¨uckler, and D. Cremers, “Deep virtual
stereo odometry: Leveraging deep depth prediction for monocu-
lar direct sparse odometry,” in ECCV, 2018, pp. 835–852.
[143] J. Watson, M. Firman, G. J. Brostow, and D. Turmukhambetov,
“Self-supervised monocular depth hints,” in ICCV, 2019.
[144] Y. Kuznietsov, J. Stuckler, and B. Leibe, “Semi-supervised deep
learning for monocular depth map prediction,” in CVPR, 2017.
[145] Y. Luo, J. Ren, M. Lin, J. Pang, W. Sun, H. Li, and L. Lin, “Single
view stereo matching,” in CVPR, 2018, pp. 155–163.
[146] X. Guo, H. Li, S. Yi, J. Ren, and X. Wang, “Learning monocular
depth by distilling cross-domain stereo networks,” in ECCV,
2018, pp. 484–500.
[147] P. Z. Ramirez, M. Poggi, F. Tosi, S. Mattoccia, and L. Di Ste-
fano, “Geometry meets semantics for semi-supervised monocular
depth estimation,” in ACCV, 2018, pp. 298–313.
[148] L. Andraghetti, P. Myriokefalitakis, P. L. Dovesi, B. Luque,
M. Poggi, A. Pieropan, and S. Mattoccia, “Enhancing self-
supervised monocular depth estimation with traditional visual
odometry,” in 3DV, 2019.
[149] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei,
“Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in CVPR,
2009, pp. 248–255.
[150] J. Xie, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “Deep3D: Fully automatic
2D-to-3D video conversion with deep convolutional neural net-
works,” in ECCV, 2016, pp. 842–857.
[151] V. Peluso, A. Cipolletta, A. Calimera, M. Poggi, F. Tosi, and
S. Mattoccia, “Enabling energy-efﬁcient unsupervised monocular
depth estimation on armv7-based platforms,” in Design Automa-
tion and Test in Europe (DATE), 2019.
[152] P. Zama Ramirez, M. Poggi, F. Tosi, S. Mattoccia, and L. Di Ste-
fano, “Geometry meets semantic for semi-supervised monocular
depth estimation,” in ACCV, 2018.
[153] Z. Yang, P. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Xu, and R. Nevatia, “Every pixel
counts: Unsupervised geometry learning with holistic 3d motion
understanding,” in ECCV Workshops, 2018.