, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular 
Image and Videos: A Comprehensive Survey 
UCHITHA RAJAPAKSHA, FERDOUS SOHEL, HAMID LAGA, DEAN DIEPEVEEN, Murdoch 
University, Australia 
MOHAMMED BENNAMOUN, The University of Western Australia, Australia 
Estimating depth from single RGB images and videos is of widespread interest due to its applications in many areas, including 
autonomous driving, 3D reconstruction, digital entertainment, and robotics. More than 500 deep learning-based papers have 
been published in the past 10 years, which indicates the growing interest in the task. This paper presents a comprehensive 
survey of the existing deep learning-based methods, the challenges they address, and how they have evolved in their 
architecture and supervision methods. It provides a taxonomy for classifying the current work based on their input and output 
modalities, network architectures, and learning methods. It also discusses the major milestones in the history of monocular 
depth estimation, and different pipelines, datasets, and evaluation metrics used in existing methods. 
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies → Shape inference. 
Additional Key Words and Phrases: 3D estimation, taxonomy, 3D reconstruction. 
ACM Reference Format: 
Uchitha Rajapaksha, Ferdous Sohel, Hamid Laga, Dean Diepeveen and Mohammed Bennamoun. XXXX. Deep Learning-based 
Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos: A Comprehensive Survey. 1, 1 (June XXXX), 46 pages. 
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Depth estimation aims to recover the 3D geometry of a scene from one or multiple images. It is fundamental to 
many applications, including autonomous driving, 3D reconstruction, augmented reality, 3D digital entertainment, 
robotics and biology. Monocular depth estimation, i.e., depth estimation from a single RGB image or video, is 
popular due to its practicality for in-the-wild and low cost. It is, however, a very challenging task due to the loss 
of information in the 3D to 2D projection process. While humans can sense the depth of images using monocular 
cues and prior knowledge, this is an ill-posed problem for computers. 
Existing depth estimation methods rely on active sensors (e.g., laser scanners) or passive sensors such as 
RGB cameras. Although active sensors such as Light Detection Range (LiDAR) and Time of Flight (ToF), which 
transmits energy (light, sound, or radio waves) onto surfaces, directly provide accurate 3D information, they are 
often expensive and time-consuming. Also, obtaining depth for small and close objects in short ranges using active 
sensors is challenging, as the sensitivity depends on the effective range of the sensors. Examples of image-based 
(passive) depth estimation methods include structure-from-motion, shape-from-X where X is a silhouette, texture, 
shading, or (multi-view) stereo [43]. Most methods require two or more images of the same scene and accurate 
 
Authors’ addresses: Uchitha Rajapaksha, Ferdous Sohel, Hamid Laga, Dean Diepeveen, Murdoch University, 90 South Street, Murdoch, WA 
6150, 
Australia, 
uchitha17669@gmail.com,f.sohel@murdoch.edu.au,h.laga@murdoch.edu.au,d.diepeveen@murdoch.edu.au; 
Mohammed 
Bennamoun, The University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, WA, 6009, Australia, mohammed.bennamoun@uwa.edu.au. 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first 
page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
permissions@acm.org. 
© XXXX Association for Computing Machinery. 
XXXX-XXXX/XXXX/6-ART $15.00 
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX

, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
2  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
 
 
calibration of the cameras. Such methods are not always practical for in-the-wild applications such as autonomous 
driving and augmented reality. The interest in monocular depth estimation methods has rapidly increased since 
they are less expensive, less time-consuming, and do not require complex camera calibration. 
Today, many researchers formulate the monocular depth estimation problem as a machine learning task. Recent 
developments in deep learning also fuel the increasing interest in deep learning-based methods for monocular 
depth estimation. This paper aims to provide a comprehensive survey and structured review of the latest deep 
learning-based methods on monocular depth estimation. We present a broad taxonomy of the existing methods 
considering more than 160 key papers appearing in leading conferences and journals between January 2012 and 
January 2024. The following list summarizes the main contributions of this paper. 
• We highlight the importance of a broad taxonomy and a comprehensive survey on monocular depth 
estimation. We review more than 160 papers published between 2012 and 2024 in major computer vision, 
computer graphics, and machine learning journals and conferences. 
We provide a taxonomy of existing methods that consolidate their input and output modalities, network 
architectures, degree of supervision, types of datasets and domain adaptation methods used to train and 
evaluate deep learning models. 
• We present several aspects of challenges in the field. We first describe the typical factors that make single- 
image or video-based depth estimation challenging as general challenges. We highlight the challenges in 
modeling the task as a deep-learning problem (Section 3). 
• We present a generic pipeline and a baseline architecture to compare the literature based on the network 
architectures they adopt at each step in the reconstruction pipeline. We also compare methods based on 
the degree of supervision and loss functions used to train existing models (Sections 4, 5 6 and 7). 
• We review commonly used datasets for training and testing deep learning models and present a summary 
of more than 20 datasets (Section 9). We also discuss the standard evaluation metrics in Section 10. 
• We discuss future research directions based on the identified gaps (Section 11). 
This paper complements other survey papers on deep learning-based 3D object reconstruction [49] and stereo- 
based depth estimation [77, 119] by focusing only on depth estimation from monocular image and videos. In 
addition, much research has been done on 360◦ monocular depth estimation [130]. However, we have left this 
topic out of the scope of our survey, as we think 360◦ is so large that it can be a topic of another survey paper. 
 
2 BEYOND EXISTING SURVEY ARTICLES 
Although several survey papers [6, 9, 14, 62, 107, 150, 156, 170, 170, 202] on monocular depth estimation are 
available, they provide a limited scope. Most importantly, they lack recent advancements in this context. Table 3 
(Section D in Appendix A) summarizes existing surveys. We provide a short summary of the limitations of them 
in Section E of Appendix A. In contrast, ours is the first to survey the seven aspects: challenges, input and output, 
network architectures, degree of supervision, datasets, evaluation metrics, and future directions in monocular 
depth estimation. We include more than 160 research papers published between 2012 and 2024, significantly 
covering more papers than existing surveys. Compared to existing surveys, we present a broad taxonomy that 
covers input and output modes, network architectures, and supervision modes. Our taxonomy covers a variety 
of research with the most recent and advanced architectures, indoor and outdoor depth estimation methods, 
and domain adaptation methods. To our knowledge, we are the first to use CNN as the baseline auto-encoder 
architecture and compare existing work based on the baseline. We have surveyed degrees of supervision; 3D 
supervised, self-supervised, semi-supervised, weakly supervised, and online learning. Finally, we provide a 
detailed discussion on future directions in this field based on the gaps identified after the survey.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  3 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
3 PROBLEM STATEMENT, CHALLENGES AND TAXONOMY 
Given a single image 𝐼 , monocular depth estimation aims to learn a function 𝑓 that estimates the per-pixel scene 
depth 𝑑 where, 
𝑑 = 𝑓 (𝐼 ). 
(1) 
Existing deep learning-based methods for monocular depth estimation focus on designing deep neural architec- 
tures that approximate the function 𝑓 , and efficiently train them to achieve the best performance. This is not a 
straightforward task, as they should also address the following challenges. 
3.1 Challenges 
Here, we discuss the challenges based on whether they are related to the general monocular depth estimation 
problem or are specific to the deep learning-based approaches. 
3.1.1 
General challenges. Estimating depth from a single RGB image is a challenging task due to several reasons: 
• 3D-to-2D mapping ambiguity: Depth ambiguity is one of the main challenges when recovering 3D 
information from 2D images. When an RGB camera captures an object in the 3D space, it loses the 3D 
properties, such as pose, volume, and 3D shape. A 2D image only contains the texture and 2D projection of 
the object in the form of a 2D pixel grid. As a result, the 2D representation of an object can have multiple 
3D interpretations, which result in depth ambiguity. Unlike stereo and multi-view images, which are rich in 
stereo cues, monocular cues alone cannot resolve such depth ambiguities. Consequently, obtaining reliable 
depth results using a single image is difficult. 
• Camera parameters estimation: Recovering the absolute depth requires estimating the camera’s intrinsic 
and extrinsic parameters. Intrinsic parameters such as focal length and aspect ratio decide the mapping of 
each point in camera coordinates to the pixel coordinates. When accurate camera parameters are available, 
depth estimation methods use them to obtain even a rough depth estimation such that the estimated depth 
renders a similar image as the input image. Therefore, camera poses enable comparing the actual and 
estimated depth using single images. However, in practical scenarios (e.g., in-the-wild reconstruction), 
camera parameters are unavailable, making the process challenging. 
• Brightness inconsistency in scenes: Depth estimation from monocular images is difficult due to the color 
and illumination variability in different inputs [40, 189]. Due to brightness inconsistencies, two images 
representing the same depth map can have different color distributions. Due to such variations, for example, 
inconsistencies during day and night, multiple inputs of the same scene under different weather conditions 
produce inconsistent depth distributions [13]. Consequently, deriving a direct relationship between the 
color of a pixel and the depth is challenging. 
Using videos instead of still images helps address some of the aforementioned challenges. Videos, however, bring 
another set of challenges, such as: 
• Temporal consistency and smoothness: Maintaining depth consistency of the outputs across the frames 
is essential. The presence of inconsistent depth values in a sequence of video frames causes unwanted 
flickering effects in the depth output [99, 151]. Avoiding such flickering effects is critical for real-world 
applications. For instance, humans are sensitive to depth inaccuracies, as such inaccuracies cause discomfort 
to the eye with a small change or inconsistency in the output sequence. Therefore, maintaining temporal 
consistency and smoothness of the estimated depth outputs is essential yet challenging. 
• Moving objects and moving camera: Monocular videos often contain objects that move rigidly and non- 
rigidly. The latter makes matching pixels across images very challenging. When a moving camera captures 
input videos, depth estimation methods should first disentangle the camera motion from objects’ motion 
to ensure accurate depth estimation. Therefore, inaccuracies in camera motion estimation also produce

4  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
inaccurate depth estimations [65]. Some approaches assume static environments and rigid movements to 
reduce the impact of moving objects. Such assumptions are not realistic for real-world applications. 
In addition to the general challenges, we highlight the major challenges related to deep learning below. 
3.1.2 
Challenges of deep learning-based monocular depth estimation. Using prior knowledge, humans easily 
understand close and far away objects in single RGB images. Inspired by this, deep learning-based methods 
formulate the monocular depth estimation as a learning problem. The following challenges are specific to them; 
• Training-related issues: Deep learning methods learn the prior knowledge from the data presented to 
the models at the training stage. However, acquiring sufficient training data and producing accurate results 
for unseen data is challenging. The following constraints are some of the training-related issues. 
– Acquisition of accurate 3D ground-truth: Learning-based methods require accurate 3D ground-truth 
depth for training. Acquiring such ground-truth is tedious, time-consuming, and requires expensive 
sensor setups. The available ground-truth depth is sparse (partial and incomplete) as well. Sometimes 
correct ground-truth depth is not paired with the 2D images in their corresponding resolution [43]. 
–  Generalizing and adapting to new domains: One of the major limitations seen in many approaches 
is that the learned depth strongly relies on the training data. Therefore, the models usually show low 
accuracy on previously unseen images. Although these methods perform well for their task-specific 
domain, they perform poorly on new domains [39, 154]. Moreover, training only on a limited dataset 
leads to the domain overfitting problem. Therefore, developing general approaches for different domains 
(e.g., day, night, indoor and outdoor) is a challenge [93]. Addressing domain shift-related issues (e.g., 
shifting from daytime to nighttime images) is essential for real-time applications to ensure the models 
perform well under raw feed with minimum pre-processing. 
• Computation time and resources: Deep learning-based methods are expensive regarding memory 
requirements and computation time. They often require GPUs during both training and runtime. In practical 
scenarios, achieving high accuracy on resource-constrained devices such as mobile devices, embedded 
systems, and virtual and augmented reality devices remains a challenge. 
While deep learning can be challenging, such methods record the best results in monocular depth estimation. 
3.2 Taxonomy 
Figure 1 provides the detailed taxonomy of the existing methods based on their input modes during training and 
runtime, network architectures, degree of supervision, datasets and domain adaptation. 
3.2.1 
Input and output. This survey focuses on monocular depth estimation methods where the input during 
inference is either a single RGB image [39, 43, 62, 63, 76, 78, 113, 116, 189, 194] or a monocular RGB video 
[112, 162, 165]. For most methods, the input during training is single RGB images annotated with either dense or 
sparse ground-truth depth values [63, 78, 134]. Other methods require stereo images or monocular video sequences 
to enable self-supervision without ground-truth depth annotation. Some use monocular videos [127, 208] to train 
the models. Temporal and geometric consistencies of the scene throughout the video are useful in producing 
depth alignments and estimating depth even without ground-truth depth. Other approaches use stereo input for 
training [39, 43, 76, 113, 116, 189, 194]. Stereo input can be either stereo image pairs [21, 39], stereo video stream 
data, or multi-view stereo. At least two rectified stereo images, i.e., left and right views, are required to obtain 
the disparity cues present in the scene and thereby acquire depth information during training. Although such 
methods require stereo images during training, they only require monocular images during inference. Hence, 
they come under monocular depth estimation.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  5 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
 
Semi-supervised (SMS) 
Monocular supervision losses 
 
Weakly-supervised (WS) 
 
ViT-CNN (VC) 
GAN-CRF (GC) 
CNN-CRF (CC) 
 
 
 
Conditional GAN (CG) 
 
Data transformation (DT) 
Domain adaptation 
Fine-tuning (FT) 
 
 
Images (MI) 
Dataset type 
 
 
 
Images (SI) 
 
Left-Right disparity consistency loss 
Disparity loss 
Stereo supervision losses 
3D supervision-based loss 
 
Online learning (OL) 
Feature -based 
Self -supervised (SLS) 
Disparity smoothness loss 
 
Vision transformers (ViT) 
 
 
Random Field based 
Hierarchical CRF (HCRF) 
 
Continous CRF (CCRF) 
 
Network architecuture 
ConvLSTM (CL) 
 
Fully connected LSTM (FL) 
 
RNN without attention (RWOA) 
 
 
 
 
Attention based encoder-decoders (AED) 
Encoder-decoder based 
 
Monocular image (RMI) 
Runtime data 
Monocular video (RMV) 
 
 
Training data 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reprojection Loss 
Photometric-based 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Taxonomy of deep learning-based monocular depth estimation techniques. The gray color box shows the summary 
of existing loss functions based on the type of supervision. 
 
 
In terms of output, existing methods produce dense or sparse depth maps [39, 43, 62, 63, 63, 76, 78, 78, 113, 134, 
189]. A depth map is an image indicating depth values at each pixel of the input. Early methods [121] produce 
low-resolution depth maps. 
Most methods compute the relative depth with respect to the objects present in the scene. Others attempt to 
estimate the absolute (metric) depth [88]. Some methods also estimate uncertainty maps, indicating how confident

6  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
the network is in its depth estimation task at each image pixel [186]. They estimate the camera parameters and 
an object-level segmentation of the scenes [51]. Some approaches produce a probability distribution of plausible 
depth for a given input image [140, 168]. 
3.2.2 
Pipeline and network architectures. We present an extended pipeline with (i) masking and data augmentation, 
(ii) feature learning, (iii) feature selection, (iv) coarse depth estimation, (v) fine depth estimation and (vi) post- 
processing. However, the network architectures in existing methods differ mainly based on the type of networks 
they use at coarse depth estimation and refinement stages. Section 6 discusses them in detail. 
3.2.3 
Degree of 3D supervision. We classify existing training procedures based on the degree of 3D supervision 
they require. For instance, some methods require images paired with their ground-truth dense depth maps [83, 
134, 172]. Such 3D supervised methods are expensive. Weakly and semi-supervised methods address this issue 
by using either sparse 3D annotations or ordinal 3D annotations, which are easier to acquire [3, 46, 76, 184]. 
Self-supervised methods, also known in the literature as unsupervised methods, only require 2D images and 
videos for training [43, 189, 194]. 
3.2.4 
Training datasets. We provide a summary of the datasets and classify them based on the type of data as 
real and synthetic and further divide them as monocular and stereo. 
3.2.5 
Domain adaptation. We also classify the domain adaptation methods used during training: fine-tuning and 
data transformation. 
4 MONOCULAR DEPTH ESTIMATION PIPELINE 
Figure 2 provides an overview of the general pipeline that most existing methods for depth estimation from 
single images and videos follow. Early methods used a pipeline composed of four main stages: feature extraction, 
coarse depth estimation, fine depth estimation and post-processing. Recent methods achieve better accuracy by 
incorporating different strategies for data augmentation with masking and feature selection. 
4.1 Masking 
Humans easily recognize the monocular cues to understand the relative depth of objects in a given image. 
Examples of cues include the horizon, vanishing point, relative object size, light and shade, interposition and 
texture gradient. Therefore, humans do not require all the information provided in the entire image to understand 
the depth, as some small regions of the visual field associated with the cues are enough for the task. Similarly, 
recent deep learning models leverage the same idea to learn depth from a sparse set of data in the image instead 
of the whole image [34]. As an initial step, masking aims to filter a sparse set of data required for training from 
the input images. Therefore, we can formulate the monocular depth estimation problem as a function of input 𝐼 , 
a mask 𝑀 and a masking operation⊗ [54]. 
𝑑 = 𝑓 (𝐼 ⊗ 𝑀). 
(2) 
This mask can be a simple binary mask, which determines the valid or invalid pixels for the sparse input, or 
a continuous mask quantifying the significance of each pixel for the final outputs as a weight or probability. 
Continuous masks perform better than binary masks [100]. 
Existing methods formulate the problem of identifying the relevant pixels as an optimization problem. They 
optimize the model to identify the smallest number of image pixels from which the deep learning models, i.e., 
CNNs, can estimate a depth map. Therefore, the estimated depth map should be as close as possible to that of 
the estimation produced from all pixels in the image [37, 54]. Hu et al. [54] show that deep learning models 
can infer depth using a sparse set of regions in an image, contributing more to depth estimation. Such regions 
depend on the input domain type. For instance, the region around the vanishing point is vital in learning to

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  7 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
Post processing 
Fine depth 
estimation 
Coarse depth 
estimation 
Feature selection 
(optional) 
Feature learning 
Masking 
(optional) 
Coarse 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Input image 
Output depth map 
 
Fig. 2. The general pipeline for depth estimation from monocular images. The pipeline consists of six stages: masking, 
feature learning, feature selection, coarse depth estimation, fine depth estimation and post-processing. 
 
 
Convolution layer 
Pooling layer 
Concatenation 
Fully connected layer 
 
Fig. 3. Coarse-to-fine refinement with global and local feature fusion [36]. This example also covers the coarse and fine 
depth estimation stages of the general pipeline. 
 
estimate depth for an outdoor scene. Therefore, masking the outdoor dataset by selecting the pixels around 
the vanishing point produces a sparse dataset, enabling higher training efficiency. In a similar attempt, Dijk et 
al. [34] show that models rely on the location (vertical position) of objects in the image rather than the object’s 
appearance or size. Apart from the aforementioned cues captured by human vision, there are depth-specific 
structural features to augment the data for depth estimation frameworks. For example, S2R-DepthNet [25] 
extracts a general domain-invariant structure map from the inputs to obtain a structural representation. Thus, 
the structural representation ignores irrelevant data and encodes only the important structural features. 
Masking strategies enable the models to learn depth with cues rather than just memorizing. Masking helps to 
develop robust deep learning models that can estimate depth accurately, even for out-of-distribution samples. 
4.2 Feature Learning 
Deep learning models learn features from the sparse or dense data provided as input. The features include 
low-level features such as color, intensity, texture and lighting, and high-level features such as pixel-level context, 
image-level context, occlusion boundaries, perspective and semantic similarity. The process involves encoding 
the input image using a backbone network (see Section 6.1). A generic feature extractor network performs 
convolutions to produce feature maps at different scales. Extracting low-resolution features, which capture 
long-range context, and fine-grained features describing local context leads to better results in depth output [148]. 
Some methods divide the input image into image patches before estimating depth. The resolution of the input 
images or patch size, the receptive field of the network, and the kernel size of the convolutional filters of its 
architecture determine the model’s capability to learn the features. Since the accuracy of the estimated depth values 
improves with input image resolution, some methods extract features at different input resolutions [52]. Some use 
a patch-based feature extraction rather than encoding the entire image to capture more fine-grain details in the 
local neighbourhood [106]. Several works use dilated convolutions to extract context information [123, 133, 176].

8  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
Dilated convolutions allow the models to expand the field of vision in learning features by retaining the spatial 
resolution of the feature maps. 
 
4.3 Feature selection 
The efficiency of the deep learning models depends highly on the features they learn. Although early methods 
treated all learned features equally, recent methods show higher accuracy with attention to the best features. For 
instance, fine details account for the quality of the output depth map produced by the models [50]. Features that 
describe fine details help to preserve more structural details in the final output. Therefore, selecting such features 
from the extracted features and learning to pay attention accordingly is crucial. Section 6.3 discusses more details 
on feature selection methods using attention mechanisms. 
 
4.4 Coarse-to-fine depth estimation 
Estimating depth from the selected features involves coarse depth estimation and fine depth estimation. 
4.4.1 
Coarse depth estimation. Progressively refining the prediction from previous layers to obtain a fine output 
is common in deep learning methods. Similarly, monocular depth estimation commonly produces a coarse depth 
as an initial step. Eigen et al. [36] propose to train two networks in a coarse to fine manner. The first network 
focuses on the global scale of the input image to produce a global depth estimation. Coarse estimation aims to 
output a depth map indicating only the overall structure of the scene. Fully connected layers are often used in 
the decoder of the coarse network to capture the entire image in the field of view, while the middle and lower 
layers of the encoder combine information from the different regions of the image. For this purpose, the coarse 
network focuses on several global features, such as the vanishing point, object locations, and alignment. Max 
pooling operations integrate global features. The fine network takes the output of the coarse network for further 
refinement with local information. 
4.4.2 
Fine depth estimation. Two ways to refine the coarse depth are (i) global-to-local and (ii) semantic 
segmentation-based depth fusion. 
•  Global-to-local: Global-to-local feature fusion is a popular coarse-to-fine procedure in CNN architectures 
(see Figure 3). Finer details captured at a local feature level yield higher accuracy for depth estimation. The 
refinement network takes the input image to produce a feature map with local features and concatenates 
it with the coarse depth feature map during encoding. Zero padding reduces any spatial size reduction 
during convolution layers throughout local refinement to obtain final output in a relatively high resolution. 
Several other studies [16, 27, 39, 66, 76, 78, 199] also proposed architectures that use coarse-to-fine strategy. 
• Semantic segmentation-based: Semantic segmentation-based monocular depth estimation utilizes the 
depth consistency within semantic regions of the input image. They segment a given image into sub-regions 
based on semantic similarity. Such methods isolate objects within an image from their background and 
consider the sky or ground as separate segments. Wang et al. [160] propose to predict the depth for each 
segment as a normalized depth map which takes values in the range of zero and one. They then aggregate 
the produced normalized depth for each segment based on global context in a divide-and-conquer manner. 
However, their method requires segmentation annotations for training, which constrains the training 
process only to the datasets that contain semantic labels. 
Semantic segmentation shows better results in depth refinement because it produces consistent depth structures 
in the output compared to those without semantic features.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  9 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
4.5 Post-processing 
Post-processing steps improve the quality of the estimated depth maps. Properties of the objects, such as shadows 
and occlusions in the input scene, are likely to create artifacts in the estimated depth map. Post-processing 
steps overcome such errors during both training and runtime. Godard et al. [43] propose a simple yet efficient 
post-processing method for estimating the uncertainty of the output depth map. They propose to estimate depth 
twice for the same input, once for the original input and again for the flipped input image. The mean value of the 
depth values of corresponding pixels in both depth maps is the final depth of each pixel. Following this, many 
methods use horizontal and vertical flipping as an efficient post-processing step in their models [120, 129]. Peng 
et al. [113] also propose a self-distillation-based selective post-processing step to adaptively select the optimum 
disparity at each pixel among all scales. 
5 ENCODER-DECODERS FOR DEPTH ESTIMATION 
 
 
 
 
 
Input image  
 
Encoder 
Decoder 
Output depth map 
Convolution layer 
Pooling layer 
Latent vector 
Deconvolution/upsampling layer 
 
Fig. 4. Baseline CNN encoder-decoder network. 
 
The existing deep learning models generally follow a common architecture with an encoder-decoder design. 
The encoder is also known as the backbone and acts as the feature extractor. The decoder produces the depth 
from the extracted features by upsampling the encoded feature vector from a low to high-resolution depth map. 
Therefore, we further decompose the non-linear processing function 𝑓 of Equation (1) into two stages: encoding 
and decoding. That is: 
𝑑 = 𝑔(ℎ(𝐼 )) = (𝑔 ◦ ℎ)(𝐼 ). 
(3) 
In other words, 𝑓 is a composition of two functions ℎ and 𝑔. The function ℎ, referred to as the encoder (Section 5.1), 
maps the input 𝐼 into a latent space, also called a latent vector, while 𝑔, referred to as the decoder, decodes the 
latent representation into a depth map (Section 5.2). Decoding usually results in a coarse depth map 𝑑, which is 
further processed with a sequence of blocks, hereinafter referred to as refinement blocks, to improve its accuracy 
and spatial and depth resolutions. 
This section briefly discusses the general encoder-decoder design (Figure 4). The section also describes the 
different design choices that existing methods use on top of the general encoder-decoder to achieve better 
accuracy. We identify three such common design choices. They are (1) the use of multiple encoder-decoders, (2) 
multi-scale feature fusion (Figure 5) within encoder and decoder, and (3) multi-scale depth estimation (Figure 6) 
at the decoder. 
5.1 Encoder 
Existing network architectures implement feature extraction as an encoder ℎ or an encoder followed by a set of 
fully connected layers. A basic encoder has a set of convolutional layers to downsample the input image to a 
latent space. However, using a stack of convolutional layers only is a computationally costly process that results

10  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Extended encoder-decoder with multi-scale feature fusion 
[57, 172, 176]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
 
Fig. 6. A generalized pipeline for the three multi-scale depth estimation strategies at the decoder. (a) Estimating multiple 
scales of depth outputs using encoder-decoder [114]. (b) Upsampling the estimating depth at multi-scale to a single scale [44]. 
(c) Fusing depth estimations to the original scale with weighted summation [185]. 
 
 
 
in an extensive number of parameters to learn. Adding pooling layers in between helps to downsample the 
outputs of convolutional layers and reduce the dimensions. Thus, they help to reduce the number of parameters. 
Therefore, a typical encoder consists of a stack of convolutional and pooling layers. The performance on the 
monocular depth estimation task also depends on the number of layers within the encoder because as the 
number of layers increases, the network gains higher representation ability [96]. In CNN-based architectures, 
the encoder can be fully convolutional (VGG and AlexNet) or a network with a set of residual layers with skip 
connections such as ResNet [43]. Such residual networks (e.g., ResNet18, ResNet30, and ResNet50) perform better 
for depth estimation tasks [74] than fully convolutional ones because they are easier to train, especially for 
deeper architectures (architectures with a higher number of layers). For instance, ResNet50 achieves the best 
results [43, 155]. ResNet architectures pre-trained on Imagenet perform better compared to the ones that are not 
pre-trained. However, residual nets with more parameters lead to overfitting due to catastrophic forgetting with 
longer training periods [45]. Therefore, the performance of pre-trained ResNet architectures also degrades with 
more parameters. 
Some methods use Vision Transformers (ViTs) as the backbone to implement attention mechanisms and 
enable the network to focus on specific areas of the image or video [8, 16, 28, 125]. Moreover, when dealing 
with video input, existing works often use RNN, such as LSTM networks, to ensure temporal consistency in the 
reconstruction. LSTM also enables the network to base its current predictions on what it has previously predicted. 
Therefore, LSTMs are more suitable for time-series inputs. We describe these methods in Section 6.2. 
Encoder 
Decoder 
Input image 
Output depth map 
n 
2 
1 
Feature map 
1/8 
1 
1/4 
1 
Encoder 
Decoder 
1 
1/2 
Input image 
1 
Output depth map 
1 
1 
Latent vector 
Latent vector 
Upsampling 
at input resolution 
Adaptive fusion

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  11 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
5.2 Decoder 
The decoder module takes the latent output vector from the encoder (Figure 4), processes it, and produces the 
target output, depth. Therefore, the decoder is responsible for up-sampling the latent vector, and it includes mainly 
unpooling, up-convolutional, or fully connected layers for mapping the features to the predicted depth map 
output. Several methods in the literature adopt the decoder design of DispNet[104] with additional upconvolutions 
to make the results smoother. DispNet estimates depth in a single scale and later methods propose to modify 
their decoder architecture to use multi-scale depth estimations (see Section 5.5). Many models use ResNet-based 
decoders as well. An ablation study [114] shows that using ResNet50 as the decoder significantly improves the 
accuracy compared to ResNet18; the decoder architecture of MonoDepth2 [44]. 
5.3 Multi-task learning 
Many methods consider depth as part of a multi-task learning problem [60, 136, 158]. Multi-task learning involves 
estimating multiple modalities such as depth, optical flow, surface normals, and object-level segmentation. For 
instance, Saxena et al. [136] use a single encoder-decoder network for optical flow and depth estimation. 
Using multiple encoder-decoder networks in parallel, rather than a single encoder-decoder, is also a popular 
approach. Multiple encoder-decoders are particularly efficient for multi-task networks. Such multi-tasking 
methods train each encoder-decoder block separately or jointly. The latter is motivated by the fact that these 
tasks are interrelated and can help improve the performance of each other if trained jointly [60, 158]. For example, 
DeMonNet [154] proposes a chain of five encoder-decoder networks to estimate optical flow, ego-motion, coarse 
depth, and refined depth using an iterative training approach. Several methods [58, 98] exploit the shared encoders 
and decoders between tasks for multi-task learning. Poggi et al. [120] experiment with two decoder networks 
and a single shared encoder. The conclusion is that multiple decoders show better performance than a single 
decoder. However, they require more memory and processing at runtime. 
5.4 Multi-level feature fusion 
Most depth estimation methods focus on feature maps of multiple scales to achieve higher accuracy [7, 57, 92, 95, 
177, 191, 197, 210]. The basic idea is to aggregate hidden features at lowers scales with the feature maps at a higher 
scale. Thereby, methods upsample the low-texture regions and blurry fine details to gain high accuracy. Therefore, 
each upsampling stage in the decoder consists of upsampling and concatenating layers to fuse low-level features 
from the encoder. Figure 5 shows the multi-scale feature fusion between the encoder and the decoder. Similarly, 
Chen et al. [24] adopt an hourglass architecture to obtain multiple-scale information. Here, skip connections 
concatenate the features. Multiple encoders also enable multi-scale feature fusion to obtain features of input 
images at different scales [176, 185, 205]. Xu et al. [176] propose a multi-scale feature fusion dense pyramid for 
this purpose. They use attention mechanisms to adaptively fuse global and local features of input images at 
multiple scales. Figure 5 shows the pipeline of feature fusion using single and multiple encoders. 
5.5 Multi-scale depth prediction 
Many existing methods compute depth at different scales at the decoder level. The multi-scale depth estimation 
strategy generates high-resolution depth maps from low-resolution outputs in a coarse-to-fine fashion. Eigen 
et al. [36] exploit this idea by estimating multiple depths at different scales. They compare the output depth to 
its ground truth at the corresponding scale. Finally, they calculate the overall loss by combining the individual 
losses at each scale within the decoder. Depth at multiple scales lowers the likelihood of the model converging to 
a local minima [44]. Therefore, it enhances the training efficiency. 
Figure 6 shows a general pipeline for the three strategies to employ multi-scale depth estimation. One way is 
to produce depth maps as side outputs at each upsampling stage of the decoder and compute the loss separately

12  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
at each scale. For example, self-distillation-based CNN architecture by Petrovai et al. [114] estimate four depth 
maps at four scales (1/8×, 1/4×, 1/2×, 1×) as outputs. The second group of methods, first estimates depth at 
multiple scales. Then they upsample each scale to a single scale to compute the loss [44] only at a single scale. 
For example, the decoder estimates depth at three stages (1/8×, 1/4×, 1/2×). The upsampling stage up-scales the 
depth maps separately to obtain four 1× depth maps before computing the loss. The third group of methods uses 
depth fusion blocks to adaptively fuse the depth maps with different scales to obtain a single fine-tuned depth 
map and compute the loss [172, 185]. Such methods deploy CRFs or attention mechanisms for adaptive fusion. 
6 NETWORK ARCHITECTURES 
We categorize the methods based on the structure and composition of the networks. We focus on CNN, Random 
fields, Recurrent Networks, Generative Adversarial Networks, and Vision Transformers as the main types of 
architectures. Additionally, we describe hybrid architectures and their advantages. Section 6.1 explains the 
CNN-based encoder-decoder network architecture as the baseline architecture. The rest are architecture variants. 
Section 6.2 compares the architecture variants concerning their advantages and limitations over CNNs. We 
categorize the papers selected for the survey according to their architectural similarity. 
6.1 CNNs as the baseline 
The encoder in a CNN is responsible for downsampling the input image while aggregating features so that the 
decoder can later use the output of the encoder network to generate the depth maps. Figure 4 depicts a schematic 
encoder-decoder network. CNNs are very powerful in modeling local features. Increasing the number of hidden 
layers in the network leads to a large number of parameters. They estimate the desired depth map by learning 
the non-linear parameters of the local regions of the input [72, 168]. However, recent experiments reveal that 
using conventional CNN operations to extract features often results in blurry predictions [155]. This is because 
the vanilla CNN operations consider every pixel as a valid pixel for feature extraction. Although this enables 
extracting the majority of the valid features that represent the monocular cues that are present in the input 
image, they also encode the unnecessary features of invalid pixels. Gated convolutions, on the other hand, are 
capable of switching off the invalid pixels from further processing through the encoding process. Thus, enabling 
the dynamic feature selection for each channel across all encoder layers. Verie et al. [155] use a standard CNN 
coupled with gated convolutions in their architecture to produce sharper and better depth maps. The feature 
fusion of a conventional CNN decoder can be described as a function of 𝑔 [58]. 
𝑔 = 𝜃 (𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣 ([𝑥, 𝐹 ])). 
(4) 
Here, 𝜃 is an activation function and 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑣 is the convolution operation of the current layer. The decoder fuses 
the upsampled decoded feature 𝑥 from its previous level and the corresponding encoder feature 𝐹 through a 
concatenation layer followed by a convolutional layer (Figure 5). 
Detail loss is a common issue in conventional CNN encoders [53]. Detail loss happens because of the intensive 
number of strided convolutions and spatial pooling. It causes the models to output low-resolution depth maps 
by reducing the resolution and spatial information during encoding. However, using dilated convolutions for 
encoding reduces this effect as they enable extracting more contextual features while retaining the spatial 
resolution of the feature maps produced by the encoder [50]. They also improve performance by reducing the 
number of computations and increasing the receptive field. 
6.1.1 
Fully convolutional networks - FCN. Architectures with fully connected layers used for the decoder are 
computationally expensive as the neurons in fully connected layers are connected to all neurons in the preceding 
layer. This results in a large number of parameters [82]. However, Fully convolutional networks (FCNs) help 
eliminate or reduce dense layers to minimize the number of learnable parameters in CNNs. Generally, they make

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  13 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
use of 1 × 1 convolutions instead of fully connected layers, allowing the network to train on variable input sizes. 
Monocular depth estimation also benefits from FCN-based architectures, which are fast training models with a 
variety of up-convolution and skip connection layers [20, 43, 50, 78, 189]. 
6.1.2 
U-Net. Many depth estimation methods use U-net as a common FCN-based encoder-decoder architecture. 
The general U-net architecture consists of multiple encoders and decoders with skip connections, which are 
connected to create a U-shaped architecture. Most existing monocular depth estimation networks use the U-net 
architecture [44, 65, 155, 165] and its variations. The number of layers used in the U-net architecture depends on 
specific requirements such as intended training and inference resolution [106]. A key advantage of using U-net 
over other designs is its ability to represent abstract features (contextual information) as well as local information. 
However, when the U-net becomes deeper (i.e., with more layers), the network requires long connections to bridge 
the corresponding encoding and decoding layers. In such cases, having long connections causes the U-nets to 
produce an output with information gaps, such as missing fine details, as the recovery of the encoded information 
at the decoder is difficult [82]. 
6.1.3 
3D-CNN. The general CNN network architectures discussed above execute the kernel operations in two 
dimensions only (RGB images with three channels). Some studies have also focused on using 3D convolution- 
based network architectures (3D-CNN) to extend the boundaries of using 2D convolutions. As opposed to 2D 
convolutions, 3D convolutions slide the kernel in three dimensions. A sequence of striding and pooling opera- 
tions in 2D convolutions decreases the model’s performance for tasks requiring fine-grained details. Therefore, 
traditional encoder architectures fail to propagate enough details for the decoder, so conventional upsampling 
operations at the decoder can recover accurate depth. To overcome this limitation, Guizilini et al. [45] propose 
to replace 2D convolutions with 3D packing and use unpacking instead of upsampling in the decoder. They 
present a near-lossless encoder-decoder using the packing and unpacking operations. However, packing and 
unpacking operations increases the network complexity as they result in more parameters. For example, the 
model by Guizilini et al. [45] reached around 128𝑀 parameters. 
Apart from 2D images, some methods also use temporal data as an additional dimension. Zhang et al. [195] 
show that 3D-CNN helps capture the change and motion information in consecutive frames for monocular depth 
estimation. They improve the architecture’s performance by convoluting the input along both the spatial and 
temporal dimensions. Temporal relations are most suitable for real-time depth estimation as they continuously 
require RGB video sequences during execution. 
6.2 Network architecture variants 
In this section, we discuss other architectures as variants to the baseline CNN and compare the advantages and 
disadvantages of them. 
6.2.1 
Random Field-based. As mentioned in Section 6.1, CNNs perform well in extracting local features rather 
than in global (contextual) features. Compared to the baseline CNN model, random fields focus more on these 
global features. In monocular depth estimation, the features around the local neighborhood are essential. However, 
the relations between the neighboring pixels and the relations between the neighboring regions (patches) or 
superpixels also carry essential information. Such global features provide information related to the depth of a 
particular region of an image. Probabilistic models (e.g., random fields) are good at modeling global features [135]. 
Random fields are probabilistic graphical models that are competent in taking the relations of a particular pixel 
to its neighboring pixels or superpixels. These methods create graphical models to represent complex structures 
using pixel values as nodes and their neighboring pixel values as edges. Early attempts in depth estimation 
leverage this nature of random fields [135]. Therefore, random field models consider statistical properties that 
encode prior assumptions and enable parametric learning. Consequently, the estimated depth is statistically

14  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
similar to the distribution sample [70]. These graphical models can learn only limited features compared to deep 
learning models, which can learn a large number of parameters to extract features. Two types of random fields 
extensively used are Markov Random Fields (MRFs) and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs). 
(i) MRF. MRFs enable the use of more contextual features and reasons more globally about the spatial structure 
of the scene. Saxena et al. [134, 135] consider the depth smoothness of nearby pixels or superpixels (patches). 
Later work on hierarchical multi-scale MRFs shows that MRFs can also model the depth of a patch of an image, 
its neighboring patches, and other possible patches that are not close to each other. Followed by this work, many 
methods use MRFs for depth-related tasks [73, 108]. 
(ii) CRF. CRF is a special case of MRFs that produce a structured output. CRFs model the interactions between 
pixels or superpixels for depth estimation. A significant amount of research formulates depth estimation as a 
conditional learning problem [94, 211]. The three main types of prevalent CRFs in depth estimation are continuous, 
discrete, and hierarchical CRFs. Liu et al. [90] propose a continuous CRF, while Liu et al. [94] consider both 
continuous and discrete depth information. The latter uses continuous variables to represent depth within 
superpixels and discrete variables to represent interactions between superpixels. Zhuo et al. [211] adopt a 
hierarchical CRF method and formulate the depth estimation not only using superpixels but also with regions and 
the overall layouts of the input image. Hierarchical approaches perform well since they also provide the benefit of 
modeling global context using pairwise relations. However, CRFs are slower to train compared to vanilla CNNs. 
6.2.2 
Recurrent Network-based. Recent monocular depth estimation methods often make use of the tempo- 
ral behavior of the sequential data (e.g., methods that rely on monocular videos for supervision). Although 
convolutional-based auto-encoders are capable of mapping the local relations of the features for depth estimation, 
they lack the ability to model the time series information. Any information that was present in the past data of the 
sequence is hardly taken into account by CNN architectures. However, the sequential data of the monocular videos 
possess useful information for the depth estimation task, from which the networks can learn the dependencies of 
the depth changes of objects in the scene across time. Recurrent-based architectures play a prominent role in this 
scenario. Recurrent networks consist of cyclic connections that enable the neural networks to learn the temporal 
behavior of the sequence of frames of a video [162]. Hidden states of a recurrent network act as agents in storing 
the sequence relations in their internal memory for future use. Compared to CNNs, an RNN back-propagates the 
information flow over time across previous instances. 
(i) Traditional RNNs. Traditional RNNs contain only hidden states, which store the memory of the previous 
state. Therefore, when processing, they take both the current and previous states. Vanilla RNNs can learn while 
back-propagating the gradient in time. Inspired by traditional RNNs, Gehgrig et al. [41] propose a generalized 
RNN, which handles data from multiple sensors. However, vanilla RNNs lack persistence in long-range sequences 
as they cannot store the previous state for very long. 
(ii) LSTM-based. LSTM networks learn long-term dependencies of multiple instances using both hidden states 
and cell states. Zhou et al. [209] use an LSTM decoder, which ensures that the memory has a higher impact on 
improving the predicted depth accuracy. Compared to fully connected LSTMs, convolutional LSTMs (convLSTM) 
are better for depth estimation since they not only enforce the learning of appearance cues at multiple scales 
but also take temporal data into account [102, 118, 195]. Kumar et al. [31] and Wang et al. [162] show that a 
recurrent-based architecture with LSTM units is capable of achieving better results with temporal information 
obtained from multiple consecutive views of a video. They both use convLSTM units to incorporate the motion 
and temporal data in previous frames to estimate depth in the current frame. However, as per the results of 
the ablation study from Wang et al. [162], interleaving LSTM units across the encoder performs better than 
interleaving across a full network or only the decoder (Figure 7). 
Similar to CNNs, in some cases, recurrent networks also leverage attention mechanisms to enhance performance 
by leveraging long-range dependencies.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  15 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
 
 
 
Fig. 7. LSTM layer arrangements in baseline architecture. (a) Convolutional LSTM layers in encoder only. (b) LSTM layers in 
both encoder and decoder. (c) LSTM layers in decoder only. 
 
 
6.2.3 
GAN-based. A Generative Adversarial Neural (GAN) network consists of two networks: a generator and 
a discriminator. The generator aims to produce realistic data from a random vector, and at the same time, the 
discriminator classifies the data as real or fake. In this context, a generator is responsible for producing one image 
(e.g., depth image, RGB image) from a given input vector, and the discriminator is responsible for determining 
the resemblance of the generated image with its original image (e.g., original depth image, original RGB image). 
Recent depth estimation methods use GAN networks due to their ability to generate depth images with higher 
accuracy. Unlike the baseline CNN model, GANs can generate a plausible distribution of samples to render an 
image. GANs are beneficial in modeling a more realistic depth image or another view. Therefore, monocular 
depth estimation techniques deploy the generative behavior of GAN networks for image or depth reconstruction. 
There are two modes of GAN in this context, 
• GAN for depth map reconstruction: In this mode, given the RGB image and its corresponding ground- 
truth depth during training, the generator network learns to predict a depth map similar to the ground-truth 
and the discriminator verifies the similarity of the generated map with the original ground-truth. The 
discriminator is responsible for distinguishing the synthetic from the original depth maps. 
• GAN for image reconstruction: In this mode, the network learns depth as an intermediary variable using 
multiple views of the same scene. The generator attempts to reconstruct one view from another as input 
and the discriminator verifies the generated view with the original target view [2]. 
(i) Vanilla GAN. Vanilla GANs cover the basic adversarial network architecture with a generator and a discrimi- 
nator. A well-trained discriminator to distinguish the dissimilarity between the rendered and original image is 
likely to produce better results. Several studies use vanilla GANs with adversarial training for monocular depth 
estimation [2, 32]. In Kumar et al. [32], two subnetworks, DepthNet and PoseNet, jointly form the generator 
network. They predict the depth and pose estimation separately in rendering a pair of predicted images so that 
the discriminator can score the likelihood of the similarity between the original and rendered images. They 
use skip connections in a general encoder-decoder-based architecture design to reduce the problems caused by 
vanishing gradient problems. Zhao et al. [203] and Xu et al. [178] also propose similar approaches with multiple 
subnetworks for depth, pose, and ego-motion. However, one major issue in vanilla GAN is when the generators 
produce over-optimized plausible depth outputs that agree with the discriminator. Therefore, the generators 
produce a smaller variety of outputs. This limitation is called the mode collapse [204]. 
LSTM 
LSTM 
De-Conv 
Conv 
De-Conv 
ConvLSTM 
LSTM 
LSTM 
Input 
ConvLSTM 
max pooling 
ConvLSTM 
ConvLSTM 
Upsampling 
De-Conv 
De-Conv 
De-Conv 
De-Conv 
Output 
Input 
Conv 
LSTM 
Conv 
Conv 
Upsampling 
LSTM 
De-Conv 
output 
Input 
Conv 
max pooling 
max pooling 
Conv 
Upsampling 
De-Conv 
Output

16  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
(ii) Cycle GAN. Several studies use Cycle GANs in monocular depth estimation due to their ability to achieve 
higher performance in image translational tasks. The major advantage over vanilla GANs is that Cycle GANs 
allow the geometric consistency between the input and target images to generate high-quality depth maps. For a 
GAN to become a Cycle GAN, it must have at least two GAN networks as subnetworks. Zhao et al. [204] propose 
a symmetrical network architecture to generalize real and synthetic domains for depth estimation. Their network 
learns to generate synthetic-to-real and real-to-synthetic images, preserving geometric and semantic content. On 
the other hand, Pilzer et al. [117] propose to deploy two GANs to reconstruct two distinct disparity images from 
stereo image pairs that mutually constrained each other in a cycled manner. Although cycled GANs successfully 
translate inputs, the computational time taken for training is higher than vanilla GANs. 
(iii) Conditional GAN. Conditional GANs (cGANs) are GANs that condition some additional information. 
They enable the conditional generation of images using auxiliary information. The purpose of using auxiliary 
information as conditions for monocular depth estimation is to stabilize the vanilla GANs by diminishing issues 
(e.g., gradient artifacts). Chen et al. [22] propose a constrained GAN by applying spectral normalization for the 
generator and discriminator. They use an adversarial-trained U-net that uses depth cues and context-aware 
structural details to estimate depth. Similarly, Jung et al. [66] propose a batch normalization-based cGAN. 
GAN-based networks generate depth maps while preserving structural information. However, the general 
performance of the GAN-based architectures highly depends on the accuracy of the discriminator. Any adversarial 
examples with missing regions (due to corners in the image and motions) can cause the discriminator to predict 
incorrect results, and the final rendered depth images may not look realistic due to this limitation. Trying to 
eliminate such cases can slow down the overall learning rate of the network [32]. 
6.2.4 
ViT-based. While convolution-based architectures yield good results in monocular depth estimation, 
they often exhibit limitations in modeling long-range dependencies due to the locality of the convolutional 
operation [182]. Handling long-range dependencies with LSTMs is also challenging as the LSTMs only take small 
segments (few consecutive frames) of video input independently. Several methods [8, 16, 28, 125, 182] propose 
ViTs to address such limitations. ViTs represent an image as a series of patches. They are known to be a better 
solution than the CNNs as they overcome the limited receptive field issue. 
In an encoder-decoder network, the backbone encoder for the model, has a higher influence on the capabilities 
of the model. For instance, when the encoder is a CNN, the down-sampling operations may lose important 
information from the original input. Although down sampling progressively increases the effective receptive field 
when it goes deeper in the network, it will be hard to regain the lost features from the decoder. ViTs outperform 
CNNs because of their nature of embedding images while maintaining a constant dimensionality throughout 
all the processing stages of the encoding [182]. Additionally, compared to CNN and recurrent networks, ViTs 
assume minimal prior knowledge [68, 110]. 
ViTs have achieved better results in depth prediction with fine-grain details using the global receptive field. 
ViT-based models are shape-biased, while CNN models can be more texture-biased. In their experiments, Bae et 
al. [8] show that shape-biased ViTs better generalize over depth than texture bias (e.g., CNN) ones. 
The total learnable parameters are high with ViTs. However, due to its parallel processing capabilities, the 
training process does not severely impact the computational time during training. ViTs enforce the information 
embedding globally across the overall image using self-attention blocks. However, one drawback is the com- 
putational complexity. The complexity of the models depends on the performance of the self-attention blocks. 
However, the input image resolution has a higher impact on the performance of the self-attention blocks and 
predicting pixel-wise depth at a higher resolution is challenging when ViTs are used [28]. 
6.2.5 
Hybrid architectures. In this section, we discuss several hybrid methods that leverage the strengths of 
different architectures together to improve the overall performance of their framework. CRFs are most commonly

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  17 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
used as a refinement step with other networks such as CNN and GANs. A recent trend is to use ViTs with CNN 
as hybrid architectures. 
(i) CNN-CRF. Since CNNs utilize local features and CRFs, on the other hand, are proven to be best with global 
(contextual) features, existing hybrid methods use them together for monocular depth estimation. Most methods 
use CRFs for the predicted depth as a post-processing step to refine the output. The output depth maps are 
sharper and more edge-conforming in hybrid CNN-CRF-based methods [19, 83, 91, 144, 172–174]. In Song et al. 
[144], propose a contextualized CNN by using class level and pixel level refinement through CRFs. Xu et al. [172] 
propose a multi-scale fusion-based depth estimation guided by CRFs. 
(iii) GAN-CRF. GANs are suitable for handling under-fitting-based issues in models [32]. CRFs, on the other 
hand, can be utilized for the structural refinement of depth maps. Puscas et al. [122] propose CRFs to couple the 
outputs of the generator network and the discriminator network of a GAN to ensure the structural consistency 
of the output in an end-to-end way. 
(iv) ViT-CNN. Using ViT alone is challenging for predicting continuous dense outputs like depth. Since trans- 
formers provide a self-attention mechanism, several methods propose hybrid architectures that use both CNN 
and ViTs [6, 182, 197]. Yang et al. [182] propose a hybrid network with ResNet50 followed by 12 transformer 
layers as the backbone for the encoder and extract features of 1/16th of input resolution. The results are still 
better than those of using CNN encoders alone. With a similar architecture, Bae et al. [8] enable higher accuracy 
for fine details by using a hybrid ViT-CNN architecture. 
6.3 Attention mechanisms in architectures 
Humans do not process everything in their field of view at once. Instead, they possess the ability to focus only on 
a subset of information. This process of selectively concentrating on the most important information enables 
perceiving things faster and more accurately. Deep learning methods incorporating attention mechanisms during 
training [111] utilize this idea for computer vision tasks. Conventional deep learning models treat all the features 
extracted from the input similarly. However, some information may have a higher impact on the classification or 
regression task, while others may not. Attention mechanisms focus on more important features for processing 
while suppressing unnecessary ones [167]. 
In this context, there are features that influence depth estimation more than others. For instance, the depth 
of a pixel does not depend only on the nearby pixels. There can be pixels widely spread in the input, but they 
carry useful information for the depth of a particular pixel. An attention mechanism is usually adopted to extract 
such long-range global dependencies. Moreover, general loss functions used for 3D supervised or self-supervised 
learning methods assume that all the regions in the input image contribute equally to the depth of the scene [64]. 
In contrast, an attention-based loss function focuses on what is necessary. Based on that, Jiao et al. [64] propose 
a novel loss function, which leverages depth awareness using attention. Following their work, SharpNet [124] 
also proposes an attention-based loss function that focuses on the occluded contours while training. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
Fig. 8. Attention blocks in encoder-decoder architecture. (a) Attention before decoding. (b) Attention after decoding. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Attention 
block 
Input 
Output 
Input 
Attention 
block 
Output

18  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
Attention maps generated during the training process guide reasoning on which information is more relevant 
for the final depth output. Several methods [89] use attention mechanisms to fuse depth at multiple scales. Using 
attention for training boosts depth estimation with respect to meaningful semantic information [147]. 
The improved version of the baseline architecture contains three components: encoder, decoder, and attention 
block (Figure 8). The order of arranging these components can differ. One way of arrangement is to encode the 
input image, compute the attention maps and then decode the latent vector [65]. The other way is to encode first, 
then decode, and finally apply the attention to the higher resolution tensors [13]. Besides, ViTs (Section 6.2.4) 
also employ attention mechanisms. There are three ways to employ attention: spatial, channel-wise, and mixed. 
6.3.1 
Spatial attention. Spatial attention is about where to focus, allowing the networks to learn the locations 
with important features. It transforms the spatial information in the input image to another space while retaining 
key information [111]. In other words, it encourages attention to more important spatial positions while training. 
Several methods use spatial attention for monocular depth estimation [64, 65, 174, 177, 196, 206]. 
Jiao et al. [64] show that the depth estimation training process encounters a data imbalance issue due to a long 
tail distribution of depth values in indoor and outdoor datasets. Because of this, easy samples with small depth 
values contribute more to the output than hard samples with large depths. Therefore, models overfit to predict 
small values. They propose to pay attention to larger depth values using a spatial attention-driven loss function. 
Johnston et al. [65] propose a self-attention module to estimate the similar depth in non-contagious regions 
(global). Since many of the existing supervised and self-supervised methods do not consider global context, they 
argue that using self-attention helps to handle long-range dependencies in monocular depth estimation. 
Xu et al. [174] use a spatial attention mechanism at multiple scales to control the amount of information 
processed in corresponding features at different scales. As a result, they utilize a structured attention module to 
identify the information pertinent to the final depth automatically. Similarly, Xu et al. [177] propose a multi-scale 
spatial attention-guided approach with semantic enhancement. 
6.3.2 
Channel-wise attention. Channel-wise attention networks learn what information to focus on [111] re- 
gardless of the spatial location. Having multiple channels (multiple filters) CNNs allow the network to extract 
more information by learning distinct features with less computation time. However, not all channels equally 
contribute to the depth of a scene. Architectures use channel-wise attention mechanisms to pay attention to the 
more important channels during training [82, 84, 145, 174, 179]. 
Accurate overall scene structure and relative depth are essential for many applications, such as autonomous 
driving and augmented reality. Most existing methods lack explicit modeling of the global scene structure. 
Channel-wise attention allows the neural networks to aggregate global features. Aggregation enables the network 
to emphasize informative features that contribute to the overall scene structure rather than its local features, 
such as neighboring pixel values. Yan et al. [179] show that an ordinary decoder does not preserve the fine 
details when it concatenates high-level features with low-level features. This results in blurry artifacts in the 
depth output. Therefore, they propose a channel-wise attention-based network that provides an overall structure 
perception and emphasis on details. To this end, they employ self-attention to capture long-range dependencies 
and a weighted summation of the aggregated features. The methods show better results with sharper object 
boundaries in the final depth output. 
6.3.3 
Hybrid. Some methods adopt a combination of spatial of channel-wise attention mechanisms [28, 59, 81, 
109, 190]. For instance, Naderi et al. [109] argue that conventional encoder-decoder networks do not consider the 
similarity between the RGB image and its corresponding ground-truth depth. Therefore, they propose to treat the 
similarities as a constraint in estimating the depth. Thus, they enhance the generic encoder-decoder architecture 
with an attention module that incorporates spatial and channel-wise attention. Their lightweight, adaptive 
geometric module can measure such similarities using cross-correlation between the encoder and decoder.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  19 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
Back propagation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Convolution layer 
Pooling layer 
 
 
 
Latent vector 
 
 
 
Deconvolution/upsampling layer 
Ground truth depth 
D 
 
Fig. 9. General 3D supervised training procedure. 
 
7 DEGREE OF SUPERVISION 
7.1 3D-Supervised methods 
Supervised methods regress the depth directly from monocular images by obtaining the supervisory signal from 
ground-truth depth, ground-truth disparity, or manually annotated depth labels provided at the training. 
Most methods use the depth acquired by range sensors as the supervisory signal during training. Such trained 
models are then directly used to predict the depth of each pixel during testing. The models perform well under 
different datasets, training to learn depth related to objects and shape priors. Models aim to minimize the loss 
between the predicted and the ground-truth depths. Figure 9 shows the generic 3D supervision procedure. 
7.1.1 
3D Supervised Methods: From Early Methods to Current Trends. We divide the main 3D-supervised methods 
into two categories based on whether they rely on hand-crafted features. 
Saxena et al. [134] proposed the first supervised monocular depth estimation method that considers depth at 
individual points and the relation between depths at different points using MRFs. Later work on enhancing this 
method is with a patch-based supervised model for unstructured environments [135] that relies on hand-crafted 
features [135]. The improved method considers monocular cues from local patches and global optimization of the 
final results for the depth relations using MRFs. 
Karsch et al. [67] propose a depth transfer-based framework that relies on non-parametric depth sampling. 
However, during runtime, retrieving depth information from a large collection or a database of RGBD images 
to search for candidate images resembling the input image is computationally expensive. They assume that 
similar images are more likely to have similar depths. Therefore, early supervised methods extensively employed 
hand-crafted features to capture the correlation between a color image and its corresponding ground-truth depth. 
Deep learning-based methods produce accurate results (Section 6) due to their ability to train end-to-end for 
multiple tasks (optical flow, surface normal, depth). Eigen et al. [36] use CNNs to regress depth maps. In line 
with the current trend, numerous studies focus on enhancing network-based methods [35, 80, 132, 201]. These 
methods obtain depth maps directly as the output from the decoder network or as an average estimate over a 
depth distribution [168]. Section 7.5.1 further describes the 3D-supervised-based loss functions. 
The major limitation is that these methods rely on the availability of large collections of ground-truth depth 
data. They have a limited capability in generalizing to previously unseen data [154]. 
7.2 Self-supervised methods 
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation methods tackle the challenge of not having enough ground-truth 3D 
data for training. These methods achieve promising results by formulating the problem as an image reprojection 
problem. During training, these methods utilize depth as an intermediary variable and generate a targeted view by 
Input image 
Output depth map 
D* 
Depth 
Loss 
(D*,D)

20  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
reprojecting a source view using image synthesis techniques and the predicted depth. These deep learning models 
learn to estimate depth by minimising the dissimilarity (similarity loss) between the synthesized (reprojected) 
view and the target view. Image reprojection and loss minimization are the two main steps involved during 
training. These methods require more than one view of the same scene as the input during training, and one of 
those views is taken as the target image to obtain the supervisory signal. Figure 10 (Section B in Appendix A) 
illustrates the generic self-supervised training process. 
We further categorize the self-supervision methods as stereo-image-based self-supervision and monocular- 
video-based self-supervision. 
7.2.1 Monocular depth by stereo supervision. These methods use rectified stereo image pairs as training data to 
learn depth by estimating the pixel disparities between the image pairs. Still, they are capable of estimating depth 
from monocular images during testing. In other words, during training, these methods either use the left image 
to obtain an inverse warp of the left image by applying the predicted disparity on the right image [39] or use 
predicted left disparity for the input left image to warp the right image to obtain the left image [11, 43, 189, 194]. 
For example, Garg et al. [39] estimate a single disparity per pixel by computing the photometric difference 
between the source-left image and the inverse warped target image. The method produces the target image by 
applying the predicted depth on the right image. For accurate disparity maps, Godard et al. [43] train the network 
to predict disparities aligned to both the left and the right images. However, they provide only the left view as 
input to the convolutional layers of the network. They propose the L1 disparity consistency penalty to ensure 
coherence. This cost makes the left-view disparity map consistent with the projected right-view disparity map. 
During training, some methods use a discrete probability distribution of disparity for each pixel and the final 
value is obtained by taking the argmin [171]. 
These methods also have some common limitations. Some pixels or regions may present only in one image of 
the stereo pair due to occlusions existing in the scene (stereo-disocculsions). During image reconstruction, these 
pixels produce noisy images. Therefore, the methods are unable to produce disparity for such pixels. In such 
cases, some methods [44, 75, 208] use different masking strategies to ignore pixels that violate the assumption 
of no occlusions. Another limitation is that warping methods are prone to producing holes in the synthesized 
image, which causes inaccurate results. One way to mitigate this limitation is by using post-processing steps. 
Recent methods use multi-view stereo images to ensure robustness to noise during training [44, 75, 208]. 
Consistency through stereo image pairs can be challenging due to noise caused by illumination variations 
and low texture regions. Some methods mitigate such issues by using a stream of stereo imagery. However, in 
rectified stereo-image sequences, the effect of stereo-disocclusion (the regions visible in one image but not in the 
opposite image) is considerably high. 
7.2.2 Monocular depth by monocular video supervision. While the previous category required stereo data during 
training, depth by monocular supervision requires only monocular image sequences and videos during train- 
ing [208]. The distinguishing feature is their focus on the temporal or geometric consistency between the adjacent 
frames in a sequence of images. These methods assume that the scene is static without moving objects, with no 
occlusions between the target and source views. Unlike the previous methods, they estimate depth using either 
known camera parameters or by estimating camera pose and ego-motion through a separate network [44]. They 
also formulate the problem as minimizing appearance matching loss and camera pose error. They require one 
or more source images of a monocular video (different viewpoints) to train the view synthesis network. The 
network learns depth while inferring the explicit scene geometry and camera pose [208]. 
Since the input is multiple adjacent frames, the model takes the current frame as the target frame and the 
previous and next adjacent frames as the source images. While most methods use separate networks to estimate 
depth and camera pose, recent methods train these networks jointly. DepthNet (the depth network) takes the 
target frame and estimates the depth value and PoseNet (the pose network) takes the entire image sequence and

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  21 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
predicts the camera pose from target to source. These methods reconstruct the inverse warped image by sampling 
the pixels from source images. Consequently, the adjacent frames provide the supervision signal for training. 
During training, these methods also require different masking strategies for robustness towards occlusions [53], 
non-rigid motions [159], or stationary pixels [213] (for objects moving at the same velocity as the camera or 
when the camera is not moving). For instance, one of the main challenges in these methods is the presence 
of moving objects, which leads to inaccurate camera pose estimation. Also, these methods highly rely on the 
accuracy of the camera pose estimators, although they only require the camera pose during training to constrain 
the depth network. These methods assume the surface is Lambertian (surfaces with constant brightness) so that 
the photometric reprojection error is meaningful [208]. Additionally, training these methods in the presence of 
occlusions, uniform texture, or repetitive patterns is challenging, as it becomes difficult to propagate the correct 
signal [114] when the scene violates these conditions. For instance, moving objects or a steady camera can cause 
the models to fail to produce accurate results. 
Several methods focus on reducing the flickering depth and inconsistent geometry issues due to dynamic 
objects, repetitive patterns, and low texture areas in monocular videos [15, 58, 99, 198]. Bian et al. [15] propose 
to maintain the depth consistency of two consecutive frames. The method estimates depth for one frame and 
reprojects the estimated depth using estimated ego-motion for the next frame. However, this method only masks 
out the dynamic regions. Therefore, their method does not explicitly address the problem of estimating depth for 
dynamic regions that cause flickering effects. Luo et al. [99] propose fine-tuning the depth network weights at test 
time with geometric constraints. The method extracts geometric constraints using optical flow and corresponding 
pixels at distant frames. Geometric constraints reduce the inconsistent regions in the output during test-time 
training. However, the method is only robust for short-term dynamic scenes. Zhang et al. [198] extend the 
previous work by explicitly modeling scene flow for dynamic scenes. This method maintains the consistency 
geometrically and temporally. Hui et al. [58] also mitigate the effects of object motion by estimating a 3D motion 
field of moving objects along with depth and ego-motion. However, these models are not robust to inaccuracies 
that occur in reprojection due to illumination changes and occlusions. 
Section 7.5.2 further describes the reprojection-based loss functions for self-supervised training. 
7.3 Semi or weakly supervised methods 
Semi or weakly-supervised methods mitigate the limitations of self-supervised methods. 
7.3.1 
Semi-supervised methods for depth estimation. Semi-supervised learning-based methods retrieve both 
supervised and cues from labeled and unsupervised ones from unlabeled images. Several semi-supervised methods 
improve image reconstruction-based depth estimation using ground-truth depth as an additional supervision 
signal. They estimate the inverse depth using stereo image pairs and maintain the photo consistency of the 
synthesized and target views. Additionally, the model also compares the estimated depth with the ground-truth 
depth. Therefore, semi-supervised methods use hybrid loss functions of image reprojection loss and per-pixel 
depth loss during the training [3, 46, 76, 184]. In addition, Amiri et al. [3] propose to use the left-right consistency. 
Baek et al. [10] leverage the same concept. However, they use separate networks for supervised and self-supervised 
loss and train them in a mutually distilled manner. Benefiting from the adversarial learning, Ji et al. [63] also train 
a depth regression network with two discriminators. Their work only requires a smaller amount of image-depth 
pairs with sufficient unlabelled images for training. , The generator network generates a depth image for an input 
RGB image, which tries to deceive the discriminator pairs. 
Aside from the mentioned methods, other semi-supervised approaches, which employ the general idea of 
training from labeled and unlabeled data for supervision, are also available in the literature. For example, Tian 
et al. [152] propose predicting depth from unlabeled images using a depth network while verifying the depth 
network’s confidence against ground truth using a confidence map. Meanwhile, Zama et al. [193] employ a

22  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
semi-supervised method using image reprojection loss aided by semantic information learned via pixel-level 
ground-truth semantic labels during training. 
Semi-supervised methods are valuable when available ground-truth depth data is limited. Even a smaller 
amount of ground-truth depth data provides a sound supervisory signal for training. Cho et al. [29] propose a semi- 
supervised learning-based student-teacher learning. The method only requires a small amount of ground-truth 
depth data for training the teacher stereo network. 
7.3.2 
Weakly supervised methods for depth estimation. Weakly supervised learning methods are helpful when 
ground-truth depth data are available yet noisy and sparse [87]. Additionally, limited ground-truth can enhance 
the performance of self-supervised learning by using depth or other existing sparse annotated (labeled) data as 
hints. These sparse data serve as a weak signal during training. The photometric reprojection losses fail to find the 
optimum depth using a global minimum due to the absence of ground-truth depth. Benefiting from depth hints, 
Watson et al. [164] propose to enhance self-supervised work to escape the problem of minimizing towards a local 
minimum. They use a depth map generated by another stereo algorithm to serve as depth hints. Similarly, Tosi et 
al. [153] use proxy disparity maps generated by a traditional stereo-matching algorithm to perform proxy labels 
to guide self-supervised learning. Methods which utilize joint 3D, self, and weakly supervision techniques are 
also available. For instance, Ren et al. [128] utilize semantic features as weak labels to ensure the consistency of 
the estimated depth. Sun et al. [149] use a pre-trained depth network to obtain pseudo-depth labels and improve 
the self-supervised training process for dynamic scenes. 
Another way of obtaining weak supervisory signals for learning is through annotation with relative depth 
information. While ground-truth depth data collection with metric data is cumbersome, annotating pair-wise 
relationships is much easier and provides relative depth values. Relative depth cues are also known as relative 
ordinal depth. Following this idea, Zoran et al. [212] train a network to estimate the ordinal relations of the point 
pairs and later aggregate the results to obtain the output of the entire scene. Considering the ordinal relative 
positions of spatially different points, Chen et al. [24] show that deep learning models can directly predict depth 
by training with relative depth annotations. 
Although high-resolution RGB images are more accessible, high-resolution ground-truth depth maps are not as 
they are in lower resolution. However, low-resolution and noisy depth maps still provide additional information 
for supervision. Therefore, the weakly supervised method by Xu et al. [175] utilizes low-resolution depth maps 
to train the network using resolution mismatched data. 
7.4 Online learning 
Offline learning/batch learning only allows the network to learn parameters on the training data. The model does 
not optimize the parameters during inference; instead, it freezes them, which makes the models specific to the 
training domain. On the other hand, online learning or learning on the fly enables the models to learn even after 
their deployment for inference. Online learning is beneficial for real-time applications of depth estimation as it 
allows for adjusting quickly to new incoming data [195]. Therefore, several studies which exploit the advantages 
of using online learning are available in literature [20, 58, 75, 97, 103, 112, 157, 187, 195, 200]. 
Two challenges in modeling online learning-based monocular depth estimation methods: scale ambiguity in 
monocular videos and lack of geometric information [200]. The latter causes the models to overfit the most recent 
data due to rapid and continuous scene changes and forgetting the past. The online learning process involves 
two steps. 
7.4.1 
Pre-training (offline learning). In pre-training, the model first trains offline using the available training 
dataset. Therefore, the network optimizes the parameters based on the offline datasets. For example, Maslov 
et al. [103] use a 3D-supervised loss, 𝐿𝑠 function to train the model offline while Wagstaff et al. [157] used a

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  23 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
𝑖 
1 ∑︁ 
𝑙 (𝑑 , 𝑑) = 1 ∑︁
(𝑑 − 𝑑 ) . 
(7) 
𝑖 
𝑖 
𝑖 
 
photometric reconstruction loss 𝐿𝑢, for unsupervised learning. Zhang et al. [200] use both loss functions to 
pre-train the model before deploying it for online learning. 
7.4.2 
Online adaptation. As the next step, the model trains again during inference by updating the pre-trained 
parameters to adapt to online data. Adaptation gradually improves the accuracy of predicting depth for the current 
input. Some methods select a single image for online learning, while others select batches of images. However, 
compared to mini-batches, large batches take longer time to train. Therefore, selecting the most appropriate 
batch size is crucial. Towards this objective, Zhang et al. [200] propose a meta-learning (learning to learn) based 
method enforcing online learning with few samples. They use the following gradient descent, ▽, for updating 
model parameters where 𝜃𝑑 and 𝜃 𝑝 are parameters for depth net and pose net, 𝐼𝑡 , is the current frame, and 𝐼𝑡 −1 is 
the previous frame [200]. 
[ 𝜃𝑑 , 𝜃 𝑝 ] ←− [ 𝜃𝑑, 𝜃 𝑝 ] − 𝛼▽𝜃𝑝 , 𝑑 𝐿𝑢 ([ 𝜃𝑑, 𝜃 𝑝 ] , 𝐼𝑡 , 𝐼𝑡 −1). 
(5) 
𝑡 +1 
𝑡 +1 
𝑡 
𝑡 
𝜃 
𝑡 
𝑡 
However, the model will require a longer time to train if the models wait a long time to obtain online data. 
Therefore, existing online learning-based methods maintain a buffer to store online data as a good practice, [75, 
187]. Another limitation is that only the models that do not allow catastrophic forgetting of previous knowledge 
will not overfit the most recent data [97]. 
7.5 Loss functions 
7.5.1 
3D supervision-based loss functions. Per-pixel depth loss is the basic loss function, which tries to minimize 
the error between the predicted and the ground-truth. The per-pixel depth loss functions differ based on how 
the distance is measured between the actual and the estimated depth. Given the ground-truth depth 𝑑𝑖 and the 
estimated depth 𝑑∗ for pixel 𝑖 of 𝑛 number of pixels in the image, the per-pixel loss in terms of absolute loss 𝑙1 
can be formulated as 
𝑛 
𝑙1(𝑑∗, 𝑑) = 
|𝑑∗ 
𝑛 𝑖 
− 𝑑𝑖 |. 
(6) 
In 𝑙1 loss, the sum of all the absolute differences between the ground-truth and the predicted depth values of 
pixels is minimized. Some methods have adopted 𝑙1 based loss function [50, 154]. 𝑙2 loss function, on the other 
hand, takes the summation of the squared differences [83, 134, 172]. 
𝑛 
∗ 
∗ 
2 
2 
𝑖 
𝑛 𝑖 
The 𝑙2 metric has the risk of getting larger errors in the presence of incorrect predictions or outliers as it takes 
the squared differences of the values. Huber loss takes the best of both worlds. Huber loss takes the squared loss 
(𝑙2) if the error value is in a defined range or use 𝑙1 otherwise. Therefore, Liana et al. [78] and Pintore et al. [118] 
use the reverse Huber Loss (BerHu) in this context. 
Another loss function is the Scale Invariant Loss (SIL), which helps measure the relationships among data 
points in the scene. Measuring the relations among pixels irrespective of the absolute global scale helps to mitigate 
the depth ambiguities occurring due to the global scale of the estimated depth map output of the scene [36, 115]. 
SIL for a pair of pixels 𝑖 and 𝑗 , 𝑑 as the log value of the difference between the per-pixel prediction and the 
ground-truth [36] is, 
𝑆𝐼 𝐿 = 1 ∑︁
𝑑2 −  1 ∑︁
𝑑𝑖𝑑 𝑗 . 
(8) 
𝑛 𝑖 
𝑛2 
𝑖,𝑗

24  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
Although the SIL relates to the 𝑙2 metric, it is responsible for ensuring that the differences for the pixels are in the 
same direction and consistent with each other. Therefore, 𝑆𝐼 𝐿 reduces the effect due to outliers, so imperfect 
predictions (outliers) will now output lower error values than 𝑙1. 
Many existing 3D-supervised methods use an enhanced scale invariant loss function introduced by Eigen et 
al. [35]. The second term in the new SIL is responsible for the first-order matching of image gradients of the 
predicted and the ground-truth depth maps. It ensures that the predictions are not only changing in small ranges 
but are also consistent in local structure. The improved SIL is, 
𝐼𝑚𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑒𝑑𝑆𝐼 𝐿 = 1 ∑︁
𝑑2 −  1
2 (
∑︁
𝑑𝑖 )2 + 1 ∑︁
[(∇𝑥𝑑𝑖 )2 + (∇𝑦𝑑𝑖 )2], 
(9) 
𝑛 𝑖 
 
 
2𝑛 
𝑛 𝑖 
where 𝑛 is the number of valid pixels, ∇𝑥𝑑𝑖 and ∇𝑦𝑑𝑖 as the horizontal and vertical image gradient of the differences, 
respectively. The new gradient term in the above equation penalizes any sudden changes to the differences that 
occur horizontally or vertically. The loss does not consider any pixel that does not have ground-truth depth 
values in the scene. Considering only the valid pixels for 𝑛 ensures no complexities occur due to missing depth 
values near object boundaries or with peculiar surfaces while minimizing the loss function. Per-pixel depth loss 
suffers from slow convergence and yields unsatisfactory local solution [38]. 
7.5.2 
Re-projection-based losses. The photometric similarity loss function is implicitly used to learn the depth. 
Several reconstruction losses were introduced over the years to measure the dissimilarity. In general, such a 
loss function is also named proxy loss [69]. Commonly, they use an appearance matching-based loss function 
to compare the dissimilarity of the two images during training. Two types of image reprojection losses can be 
identified as photometric loss [12, 43, 163, 210] or feature loss [194]. Photometric loss refers to the per-pixel color 
loss between the images where 𝐼 is the target image, 𝐼 
′ the synthesized image, and 𝑝𝑒 the reprojection error, 
𝑆𝐿𝑝 = 
∑︁ 
𝑝𝑒 (𝐼, 𝐼 
′ ). 
(10) 
 
Later research emphasizes the importance of extending the loss function by making use of other factors such as 
disparity smoothness, consistency, and depth density. Despite that, the photometric reprojection loss has the 
disadvantage of converging to a local-minima during the self-supervised learning [164]. 
Some methods utilize the feature loss between the original and the synthesized image instead of relying only 
on pixel color value. Ye et al. [189] is an example where a feature-based warping loss for both single view depth 
estimation and visual odometry has been used. 
7.5.3 
Ordinal regression-based losses. Depth values carry strong ordinal correlation. Therefore, some methods 
utilize ordinal regression-based losses rather than simply modeling the task as a linear regression problem [23, 
26, 33, 38]. Such methods discretize the depth values into a set of labels and learn to estimate depth as discrete 
values. For example, Fu et al. [38] use space-increasing discretization to produce an ordered set of labels for depth 
and train a network with an ordinal loss function. Several other methods also incorporate ordinal regression for 
depth estimation by considering the task as a classification task. Diaz et al. [33] propose a method that converts 
ground-truth depth data labels into soft probability distributions. They train the model to output an ordinal 
probability distribution that matches the ground truth via a categorical loss function. 
8 GENERALIZATION AND DOMAIN ADAPTATION 
In this section, we describe the methods that focus on developing deep learning models that generalize well to 
unseen data or new domains. 
𝑖 
𝑖

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  25 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
8.1 Generalization over unseen data 
Generalization in terms of the deep learning model refers to the model’s ability to estimate accurate results 
to data unseen during training. Existing methods utilize two strategies to achieve generalization: learning to 
generalize over a large distribution of data or adopting zero-shot and few-shot learning. 
Several methods train the models to learn the general features over a large distribution of data. For instance, 
Bae et al. [6] propose to use shape-biased models such as transformer networks to achieve generalization. The 
study reveals that shape-biased models generalize well on out-of-distribution training datasets compared with 
texture-biased models such as CNNs. Yu et al. [192] propose to enhance generalization ability by combining 
knowledge distillation, intermediate prediction layers and loss re-balancing. Yang et al. [188] propose to decouple 
the camera parameters from pictorial cues to learn generalization over large data distribution. Ranftl et al. [126] 
achieve generalization using zero-shot cross dataset transfer. The method allows the model to train with multiple 
datasets. Therefore, the model learns from a large distribution of data. 
Zero-shot and few-short learning methods estimate the depth of unseen data by training only on limited 
labeled data [47, 55]. They use auxiliary information such as textual descriptions or semantic embedding to 
achieve generalization. 
Recently, visual foundation model-based methods show superior results in generalization [71, 183]. Such 
methods leverage limited labeled depth data along with large-scale unlabelled in-the-wild data for generalization. 
For example. DepthAnything [183] shows that powerful data augmentation strategies and pseudo annotations 
for large-scale data benefit deep-learning models to achieve excellent results in zero-shot depth estimation. 
8.2 Domain adaptation 
The monocular depth estimation problem expands over many domains, including indoor, outdoor, synthetic, 
real, day, night, urban, rural, and other environments. In the meantime, deep learning-based monocular depth 
estimation solutions suffer from domain shifting. In other words, the models perform poorly when the data 
distribution of the inference domain is different from the training data distribution. Due to the domain-biased 
training, the models cannot adapt to a new domain at inference. This also results in generalization glitches [77] 
for new domains. For practical scenarios, domain adaptation is crucial. Therefore, a considerable amount of 
research in the literature focus on solving this challenge [4, 48, 74, 93, 102, 131, 161, 204, 206, 207]. In this section, 
we describe two main approaches in the literature, for domain adaptation. 
8.2.1 
Adaptation by fine tuning. The idea is to initially train the models on one domain and then fine-tune 
them on the others. Roussel et al. [131] focus on the sensitivity of the pre-trained models to domain shift using 
two datasets and propose fine-tuning the pre-trained model with a new dataset to get better results. However, 
fine-tuning during inference is a burden for offline learning-based models since it requires retraining every time 
for new inference. On the other hand, online fine-tuning [187, 200] learn to adapt to new domains as new data 
comes. Section 7.4 further describes these techniques. However, online adaptation leads to models that overfit the 
most recent data. 
8.2.2 
Adaptation by data transformation. These methods attempt to transform the data from one domain to 
match with the data of another domain [77]. They use a distribution alignment process from content to style 
image. The alignment minimizes the distance between the source and target feature distributions and style 
transfer [4]. Thus, the domains look similar. Atapour et al. [4] propose a GAN-based style transfer method to 
transform the style of synthetic data from a gaming environment to match the real data. Therefore, even though 
they train the model from synthetic data, the model produces more realistic depth maps for the real images during 
inference. The method uses adversarial learning to translate images from synthetic and real-world domains. 
AdaDepth [74] provides a GAN-based unsupervised approach for adapting from synthetic RGBD data to real

26  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
scenes. Zhen et al. [207] also propose to use GANs to transform from synthetic to real. The method encourages 
the distribution mapping from synthetic to real but does not explicitly require the translated image to have a 
correct relationship to its corresponding depth. They adopt a wide-spectrum input translation network using 
adversarial loss for synthetic training and reconstruction loss for real image training. Zhao et al. [206] propose to 
perform real-to-synthetic translation by removing challenging regions from real images to bring them closer to 
the synthetic domain. However, they use a small amount of real data and a large amount of synthetic data. 
Domain shift between day and night images is also a concern. Domain adaptation is necessary for the models 
trained with only day images to estimate accurate depth for night images. Liu et al. [93] propose to learn private 
(illumination) and invariant features (texture) separately. Invariant features are similar for the same scene day 
and night, while private features are not. They train a network to translate day images to night images while 
ensuring consistent invariant features. 
9 DATASETS 
Deep learning-based depth estimation models require RGB and depth data for training and evaluation. We briefly 
discuss the content of the selected datasets. Section A in the Appendix A further discusses the depth sensing 
techniques used in datasets and Section F provides short descriptions of the commonly used datasets. 
9.1 Domain type 
Generally, datasets include data from either indoor or outdoor environments. For instance, depth estimation for 
the autonomous driving task requires outdoor road datasets such as KITTI [105], Cityscapes [30], and Oxford 
robot car [101]. These include various data gathered for rural, highway, and urban areas with complex scenes 
containing pedestrians, road vehicles, and buildings during day and night. Indoor scenes are mostly living rooms 
and industrial halls under varying illuminations. Datasets containing animals, plants, and other nature-related 
scenes are infrequent. A variety of datasets covering many domains is essential for developing more generalized 
models. 
9.2 Images and video types 
Both natural and synthetic datasets are available. Synthetic data are existing digital 3D models (ShapeNet, 
Blendswap). Synthetic data provides accurate depth aligned with the objects in scenes. However, they lack 
realistic properties. Models trained with synthetic data fail to perform well for real images. Therefore, many 
studies have used real RGB-D datasets. We further divide real datasets into stereo or monocular datasets. We 
summarize 23 datasets in Table 1. 
10 EVALUATION METRICS 
Two types of metrics used for evaluation are the depth accuracy metric and the depth error metric. Depth accuracy 
metrics measure the accuracy as the percentage of pixels that exceed a predefined threshold error. Depth error 
metrics, on the other hand, provide the deviation of the estimated depth from the expected depth. A model 
performs better than others if the results for accuracy metrics are high or the results for error metrics are low. 
The evaluation metrics commonly used in the literature are summarized in Table 4 (Section G in Appendix A). 
11 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
Although existing methods show promising results in monocular depth estimation, there are still gaps that remain 
unresolved. We briefly outline those research gaps below. 
• Inaccurate results for thin, small, and distant objects. The depth accuracy differs with the size of the object 
in the scene and its distance to the camera. Since thin and small objects such as plant leaves, animal fur,

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  27 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
Table 1. A summary of 23 datasets in literature; "Cam. Intr": Camera Intrinsics, "Cam. Extr": Camera Extrinsics. 
 
Dataset 
Year 
Domain Type 
Stereo /Mono 
Depth Type 
# scenes 
Cam. Intr. 
Cam. Extr. 
Resolution 
Purpose 
Carrier 
KITTI-360 [86] 
2022 
Outdoor 
Stereo 
LiDAR 
300K 
Y 
Y 
180◦ fish eye 
Scene understanding, semantic SLAM 
Vehicle 
TiktokDataset [61] 
2022 
Indoor and Outdoor 
Mono 
- 
100K 
Y 
N 
1080×604 
social media videos of dressed humans, their fore- 
selfie videos 
ground and uv coordinates 
A2D2 [42] 
2020 
Outdoor 
Stereo 
LiDAR 
41277 
Y 
Y 
1920×1208 
Auto. driving 
Car 
HR-VS [180] 
2019 
Synthetic, Outdoor 
Stereo 
Dense Eucl. 
780 
- 
- 
2056×2464 
Auto. driving 
- 
OmniHouse [166] 
2019 
Synthetic, fisheye 
_ 
Dense 
2560 
- 
- 
800×768 
Omni directional depth 
- 
Driving Stereo [181] 
2019 
Outdoor 
Stereo 
LiDAR 
182188 
Y 
Y 
1762×800 
Auto. driving 
Car 
AppolloScape [56] 
2019 
Outdoor 
Stereo 
LiDAR 
5165 
Y 
3130×960 
Auto. driving 
Car 
MegaDepth [85] 
2018 
real, internet images 
Mono 
Dense 
130K 
N 
N 
1600×1600 
3D Reconstruction 
- 
TUM VI [139] 
2018 
Indoor, Outdoor 
stereo 
- 
28 
Y 
Y 
1024×1024 
Odotmetry and SLAM 
Aerial Vehicle 
Oxford robot car [101] 
2017 
Outdoor 
Stereo 
LiDAR 
20M 
Y 
Y 
1280×960 
Auto. driving 
Car 
Blendswap [154] 
2017 
Synthetic, Indoor 
- 
- 
150 
- 
- 
1024×436 
Optical flow eval. 
- 
ETH3D [138] 
2017 
Indoor, Outdoor 
Stereo 
LiDAR 
Y 
Y 
940×490 
3D reconstruction 
Person 
SUNCG [143] 
2017 
Synthetic, Indoor 
- 
- 
45K 
- 
- 
640×480 
3D reconstruction 
- 
Cityscapes [30] 
2016 
Outdoor 
Stereo 
- 
25K 
Ego Motion 
Ego Motion 
2048×1024 
segmentation , scene understanding 
Car 
EuroC [17] 
2016 
Indoor 
Stereo 
Leica MS50 laser 
11 
Y 
Y 
752×480 
3D reconstruction 
Micro Aerial vehicle 
SceneFlow [104] 
2016 
Synthetic 
Stereo 
- 
35k 
- 
- 
960×540 
Optical flow, 3D reconstruction 
- 
DTU [1] 
2016 
Real, small object 
Multi view Stereo 
Structured light scans 
80 
Y 
Y 
1200×1600 
Small object reconstruction 
Robot 
KITTI [105] 
2015 
Outdoor 
Stereo 
LiDAR 
400 
Y 
Y 
1242×376 
Autonomous driving 
Car 
Middleburry [137] 
2014 
Indoor 
Stereo 
Dense 
30 
Y 
Y 
2948×1988 
Stereo matching 
horizontal optical rail 
SUN3D [169] 
2013 
Indoor 
Mono 
Xtion 
415 
- 
Y 
640×480 
scene understanding 
Person 
NYU V2 [141] 
2012 
Indoor 
Stereo 
Kinect depth 
464 
N 
N 
640×480 
Segmentation 
Person 
RGB-D SLAM [146] 
2012 
Indoor 
Mono 
Kinect depth 
39 
Y 
Y 
640×480 
visual SLAM, odometry 
Handheld, pioneer robot 
Sintel [18] 
2012 
Synthetic 
- 
- 
1628 
- 
- 
1024×436 
Optical flow eval. 
- 
 
cat whiskers, bird feathers, and human hair only take a few pixels of the entire scene, estimating depth 
for such objects is challenging. Estimating depth with attention to thin and small objects is a potential 
direction for future research. 
•  Limitations in self-supervision. Existing self-supervised methods rely on matching pixels across multiple 
views. Matching pixels across frames is challenging in the presence of non-rigid motions of objects [114]. 
Current methods only attempt to mitigate the effect of rigid motions of objects using masking strategies. 
Stereomatching-based methods also suffer from stereo occlusions, a significant problem during training. 
Existing self-supervised methods produce outputs with texture copy artifacts and depth discontinuities in 
the presence of occlusions. Similar pixels in multiple regions cause ambiguity issues. Therefore, matching 
pixels across different views is challenging in similar regions due to complex lighting conditions, repetitive 
patterns, and texture-less regions [40]. 
• Inaccurate depth for complex materials. Existing methods fail to estimate accurate depth for complex 
materials with transparent and reflective surfaces (e.g., glass and mirrors in objects such as vehicles) as 
they lack context awareness. The shadows and illumination variances in inputs also cause inaccuracies. 
• Methods limited to estimate at eye-level depth. Existing methods propose to estimate depth for views 
captured at eye level. However, estimating depth from an aerial view, wide-angle view (panoramic) and the 
point of view of a ground-level observer (worm’s view) are crucial tasks that need further attention. 
• Methods limited only for several applications. Most existing methods propose the general applications of 
monocular depth estimation, such as autonomous navigation and augmented reality. In contrast, only a 
few applications are available in medicine, biology and agriculture. For applications in the medical field, 
sub-pixel accuracy is essential. Existing methods cannot achieve that level of accuracy. 
• Lack of explainability. Deep learning-based methods still suffer from the black-box nature. Due to that, the 
outputs are difficult to explain or interpret. Therefore, further research on improving the interpretability 
and explainability of the models without degrading their performance is another potential direction. 
• Real-time depth estimation. Accurate depth estimation for real-time applications also remains a problem due 
to the availability of noisy feed and inconsistent lighting conditions in real-time inputs [72]. Performance 
limitation due to limited processing power is a significant factor causing them to perform poorly. 
• CLIP models for depth. Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) has become an emerging trend 
in-depth estimation [5, 55, 142]. CLIP-based methods enable models to gain a vast general knowledge of 
estimating depth using the knowledge embedded with natural languages. However, CLIP models that are

28  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
pretrained with human language prompts and human-set semantics are prone to human-biased choice of 
ordinal depth bins [5, 142]. Human bias limits the model’s ability to generalize well and learn depth as an 
abstract concept. Therefore, further research on CLIP models for depth estimation is a potential direction. 
Table 2 (Section C in Appendix A) provides a consolidated summary of the publications included in this survey. 
12 CONCLUSION 
This paper comprehensively surveys the deep learning-based monocular depth estimation methods. We discuss 
the challenges in estimating depth from monocular images and videos. We present a taxonomy and classify the 
methods based on their input/output modality, network architectures, and training supervision. We present a 
generic monocular depth estimation pipeline and a baseline encoder-decoder architecture, representing existing 
deep learning methods. Existing architectures have achieved high accuracy by incorporating multi-scale feature 
fusion techniques and attention mechanisms in their architectures. We identify increased attention toward 
domain adaptation and self-supervision techniques, considering the methods that emphasize training. Finally, we 
highlight the gaps identified from the survey, which are emerging topics for future research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Henrik Aanæs, Rasmus Ramsbøl Jensen, George Vogiatzis, Engin Tola, and Anders Bjorholm Dahl. 2016. Large-scale data for 
multiple-view stereopsis. International Journal of Computer Vision 120, 2 (2016), 153–168. 
[2] Filippo Aleotti, Fabio Tosi, Matteo Poggi, and Stefano Mattoccia. 2018. Generative adversarial networks for unsupervised monocular 
depth prediction. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision workshops. 0–0. 
[3] Ali Jahani Amiri, Shing Yan Loo, and Hong Zhang. 2019. Semi-supervised monocular depth estimation with left-right consistency 
using deep neural network. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO). IEEE, 602–607. 
[4] Amir Atapour-Abarghouei and Toby P Breckon. 2018. Real-time monocular depth estimation using synthetic data with domain 
adaptation via image style transfer. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2800–2810. 
[5] Dylan Auty and Krystian Mikolajczyk. 2023. Learning to prompt clip for monocular depth estimation: Exploring the limits of human 
language. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 2039–2047. 
[6] Jinwoo Bae, Kyumin Hwang, and Sunghoon Im. 2023. A study on the generality of neural network structures for monocular depth 
estimation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2023). 
[7] Jinwoo Bae, Sungho Moon, and Sunghoon Im. 2022. Deep Digging into the Generalization of Self-supervised Monocular Depth 
Estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11083 (2022). 
[8] Jinwoo Bae, Sungho Moon, and Sunghoon Im. 2022. MonoFormer: Towards Generalization of self-supervised monocular depth 
estimation with Transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11083 (2022). 
[9] Jinwoo Bae, Sungho Moon, and Sunghoon Im. 2023. Deep digging into the generalization of self-supervised monocular depth estimation. 
In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, Vol. 37. 187–196. 
[10] Jongbeom Baek, Gyeongnyeon Kim, and Seungryong Kim. 2022. Semi-Supervised Learning with Mutual Distillation for Monocular 
Depth Estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09737 (2022). 
[11] Juan Luis Gonzalez Bello and Munchurl Kim. 2021. Self-Supervised Deep Monocular Depth Estimation with Ambiguity Boosting. IEEE 
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2021). 
[12] Juan Luis Gonzalez Bello, Jaeho Moon, and Munchurl Kim. 2024. Self-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimation with Positional Shift 
Depth Variance and Adaptive Disparity Quantization. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing (2024). 
[13] Shariq Farooq Bhat, Ibraheem Alhashim, and Peter Wonka. 2021. Adabins: Depth estimation using adaptive bins. In IEEE conference on 
computer vision and pattern recognition. 4009–4018. 
[14] Amlaan Bhoi. 2019. Monocular depth estimation: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.09402 (2019). 
[15] Jiawang Bian, Zhichao Li, Naiyan Wang, Huangying Zhan, Chunhua Shen, Ming-Ming Cheng, and Ian Reid. 2019. Unsupervised 
scale-consistent depth and ego-motion learning from monocular video. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 (2019). 
[16] Aljaz Bozic, Pablo Palafox, Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner. 2021. Transformerfusion: Monocular rgb scene reconstruction 
using transformers. Advances in neural information processing systems 34 (2021). 
[17] Michael Burri, Janosch Nikolic, Pascal Gohl, Thomas Schneider, Joern Rehder, Sammy Omari, Markus W Achtelik, and Roland Siegwart. 
2016. The EuRoC micro aerial vehicle datasets. The International Journal of Robotics Research 35, 10 (2016), 1157–1163. 
[18] Daniel J Butler, Jonas Wulff, Garrett B Stanley, and Michael J Black. 2012. A naturalistic open source movie for optical flow evaluation. 
In European conference on computer vision. Springer, 611–625.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  29 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
[19] Yuanzhouhan Cao, Zifeng Wu, and Chunhua Shen. 2017. Estimating depth from monocular images as classification using deep fully 
convolutional residual networks. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 28, 11 (2017), 3174–3182. 
[20]  Vincent Casser, Soeren Pirk, Reza Mahjourian, and Anelia Angelova. 2019. Unsupervised monocular depth and ego-motion learning 
with structure and semantics. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops. 0–0. 
[21] Po-Yi Chen, Alexander H Liu, Yen-Cheng Liu, and Yu-Chiang Frank Wang. 2019. Towards scene understanding: Unsupervised monocular 
depth estimation with semantic-aware representation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2624–2632. 
[22] Richard Chen, Faisal Mahmood, Alan Yuille, and Nicholas J Durr. 2018. Rethinking monocular depth estimation with adversarial 
training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.07528 (2018). 
[23] Tian Chen, Shijie An, Yuan Zhang, Chongyang Ma, Huayan Wang, Xiaoyan Guo, and Wen Zheng. 2020. Improving monocular depth 
estimation by leveraging structural awareness and complementary datasets. In European conference on computer vision. Springer, 
90–108. 
[24] Weifeng Chen, Zhao Fu, Dawei Yang, and Jia Deng. 2016. Single-image depth perception in the wild. Advances in neural information 
processing systems 29 (2016). 
[25] Xiaotian Chen, Yuwang Wang, Xuejin Chen, and Wenjun Zeng. 2021. S2r-depthnet: Learning a generalizable depth-specific structural 
representation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 3034–3043. 
[26] Yuru Chen, Haitao Zhao, Zhengwei Hu, and Jingchao Peng. 2021. Attention-based context aggregation network for monocular depth 
estimation. International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics 12, 6 (2021), 1583–1596. 
[27] Zhi Chen, Xiaoqing Ye, Wei Yang, Zhenbo Xu, Xiao Tan, Zhikang Zou, Errui Ding, Xinming Zhang, and Liusheng Huang. 2021. 
Revealing the Reciprocal Relations Between Self-Supervised Stereo and Monocular Depth Estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
International Conference on Computer Vision. 15529–15538. 
[28] Zeyu Cheng, Yi Zhang, and Chengkai Tang. 2021. Swin-Depth: Using Transformers and Multi-Scale Fusion for Monocular-Based 
Depth Estimation. IEEE Sensors Journal 21, 23 (2021), 26912–26920. 
[29] Jaehoon Cho, Dongbo Min, Youngjung Kim, and Kwanghoon Sohn. 2021. Deep monocular depth estimation leveraging a large-scale 
outdoor stereo dataset. Expert Systems with Applications 178 (2021), 114877. 
[30] Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and 
Bernt Schiele. 2016. The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern 
recognition. 3213–3223. 
[31] Arun CS Kumar, Suchendra M Bhandarkar, and Mukta Prasad. 2018. Depthnet: A recurrent neural network architecture for monocular 
depth prediction. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition Workshops. 283–291. 
[32] Arun CS Kumar, Suchendra M. Bhandarkar, and Mukta Prasad. 2018. Monocular Depth Prediction Using Generative Adversarial 
Networks. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition Workshops. 
[33] Raul Diaz and Amit Marathe. 2019. Soft labels for ordinal regression. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and 
pattern recognition. 4738–4747. 
[34] Tom van Dijk and Guido de Croon. 2019. How do neural networks see depth in single images?. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
International Conference on Computer Vision. 2183–2191. 
[35] David Eigen and Rob Fergus. 2015. Predicting depth, surface normals and semantic labels with a common multi-scale convolutional 
architecture. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 2650–2658. 
[36] David Eigen, Christian Puhrsch, and Rob Fergus. 2014. Depth map prediction from a single image using a multi-scale deep network. 
Advances in neural information processing systems 27 (2014). 
[37] Sara Elkerdawy, Hong Zhang, and Nilanjan Ray. 2019. Lightweight monocular depth estimation model by joint end-to-end filter 
pruning. In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). IEEE, 4290–4294. 
[38] Huan Fu, Mingming Gong, Chaohui Wang, Kayhan Batmanghelich, and Dacheng Tao. 2018. Deep ordinal regression network for 
monocular depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2002–2011. 
[39] Ravi Garg, Vijay Kumar Bg, Gustavo Carneiro, and Ian Reid. 2016. Unsupervised cnn for single view depth estimation: Geometry to 
the rescue. In European conference on computer vision. Springer, 740–756. 
[40] Stefano Gasperini, Nils Morbitzer, HyunJun Jung, Nassir Navab, and Federico Tombari. 2023. Robust monocular depth estimation 
under challenging conditions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. 8177–8186. 
[41] Daniel Gehrig, Michelle Rüegg, Mathias Gehrig, Javier Hidalgo-Carrió, and Davide Scaramuzza. 2021. Combining events and frames 
using recurrent asynchronous multimodal networks for monocular depth prediction. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 6, 2 (2021), 
2822–2829. 
[42]  Jakob Geyer, Yohannes Kassahun, Mentar Mahmudi, Xavier Ricou, Rupesh Durgesh, Andrew S Chung, Lorenz Hauswald, Viet Hoang 
Pham, Maximilian Mühlegg, Sebastian Dorn, et al. 2020. A2d2: Audi autonomous driving dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06320 
(2020). 
[43] Clément Godard, Oisin Mac Aodha, and Gabriel J Brostow. 2017. Unsupervised monocular depth estimation with left-right consistency. 
In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 270–279.

30  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
[44] Clément Godard, Oisin Mac Aodha, Michael Firman, and Gabriel J Brostow. 2019. Digging into self-supervised monocular depth 
estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision. 3828–3838. 
[45] Vitor Guizilini, Rares Ambrus, Sudeep Pillai, Allan Raventos, and Adrien Gaidon. 2020. 3d packing for self-supervised monocular 
depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2485–2494. 
[46] Vitor Guizilini, Jie Li, Rares Ambrus, Sudeep Pillai, and Adrien Gaidon. 2020. Robust semi-supervised monocular depth estimation with 
reprojected distances. In Conference on robot learning. PMLR, 503–512. 
[47] Vitor Guizilini, Igor Vasiljevic, Dian Chen, Rares, Ambrus, , and Adrien Gaidon. 2023. Towards zero-shot scale-aware monocular depth 
estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 9233–9243. 
[48] Rui Guo, Babajide Ayinde, Hao Sun, Haritha Muralidharan, and Kentaro Oguchi. 2019. Monocular depth estimation using synthetic 
images with shadow removal. In 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC). IEEE, 1432–1439. 
[49] Xian-Feng Han, Hamid Laga, and Mohammed Bennamoun. 2019. Image-based 3D object reconstruction: State-of-the-art and trends in 
the deep learning era. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 43, 5 (2019), 1578–1604. 
[50] Zhixiang Hao, Yu Li, Shaodi You, and Feng Lu. 2018. Detail preserving depth estimation from a single image using attention guided 
networks. In 2018 international conference on 3D vision (3DV). IEEE, 304–313. 
[51] Lei He, Jiwen Lu, Guanghui Wang, Shiyu Song, and Jie Zhou. 2021. SOSD-Net: Joint semantic object segmentation and depth estimation 
from monocular images. Neurocomputing 440 (2021), 251–263. 
[52] Mu He, Le Hui, Yikai Bian, Jian Ren, Jin Xie, and Jian Yang. 2022. RA-Depth: Resolution Adaptive Self-supervised Monocular Depth 
Estimation. In European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 565–581. 
[53] Minhyeok Heo, Jaehan Lee, Kyung-Rae Kim, Han-Ul Kim, and Chang-Su Kim. 2018. Monocular depth estimation using whole strip 
masking and reliability-based refinement. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). 36–51. 
[54] Junjie Hu, Yan Zhang, and Takayuki Okatani. 2019. Visualization of convolutional neural networks for monocular depth estimation. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 3869–3878. 
[55] Xueting Hu, Ce Zhang, Yi Zhang, Bowen Hai, Ke Yu, and Zhihai He. 2024. Learning to adapt CLIP for few-shot monocular depth 
estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 5594–5603. 
[56] Xinyu Huang, Peng Wang, Xinjing Cheng, Dingfu Zhou, Qichuan Geng, and Ruigang Yang. 2019. The apolloscape open dataset for 
autonomous driving and its application. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 42, 10 (2019), 2702–2719. 
[57] Zixuan Huang, Junming Fan, Shenggan Cheng, Shuai Yi, Xiaogang Wang, and Hongsheng Li. 2019. Hms-net: Hierarchical multi-scale 
sparsity-invariant network for sparse depth completion. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 29 (2019), 3429–3441. 
[58] Tak-Wai Hui. 2022. RM-Depth: Unsupervised Learning of Recurrent Monocular Depth in Dynamic Scenes. In IEEE/CVF Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 1675–1684. 
[59] Lam Huynh, Phong Nguyen-Ha, Jiri Matas, Esa Rahtu, and Janne Heikkilä. 2020. Guiding monocular depth estimation using depth- 
attention volume. In European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 581–597. 
[60] Yasamin Jafarian and Hyun Soo Park. 2021. Learning high fidelity depths of dressed humans by watching social media dance videos. In 
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 12753–12762. 
[61] Yasamin Jafarian and Hyun Soo Park. 2022. Self-supervised 3D Representation Learning of Dressed Humans from Social Media Videos. 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2022). 
[62] Pan Ji, Runze Li, Bir Bhanu, and Yi Xu. 2021. Monoindoor: Towards good practice of self-supervised monocular depth estimation for 
indoor environments. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 12787–12796. 
[63] Rongrong Ji, Ke Li, Yan Wang, Xiaoshuai Sun, Feng Guo, Xiaowei Guo, Yongjian Wu, Feiyue Huang, and Jiebo Luo. 2019. Semi-supervised 
adversarial monocular depth estimation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 42, 10 (2019), 2410–2422. 
[64] Jianbo Jiao, Ying Cao, Yibing Song, and Rynson Lau. 2018. Look deeper into depth: Monocular depth estimation with semantic booster 
and attention-driven loss. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 53–69. 
[65] Adrian Johnston and Gustavo Carneiro. 2020. Self-supervised monocular trained depth estimation using self-attention and discrete 
disparity volume. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 4756–4765. 
[66] Hyungjoo Jung, Youngjung Kim, Dongbo Min, Changjae Oh, and Kwanghoon Sohn. 2017. Depth prediction from a single image with 
conditional adversarial networks. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP). IEEE, 1717–1721. 
[67] Kevin Karsch, Ce Liu, and Sing Bing Kang. 2014. Depth transfer: Depth extraction from video using non-parametric sampling. IEEE 
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 36, 11 (2014), 2144–2158. 
[68] Salman Khan, Muzammal Naseer, Munawar Hayat, Syed Waqas Zamir, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Mubarak Shah. 2021. Transformers 
in vision: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) (2021). 
[69] Sungyeon Kim, Dongwon Kim, Minsu Cho, and Suha Kwak. 2020. Proxy Anchor Loss for Deep Metric Learning. In 2020 IEEE conference 
on computer vision and pattern recognition. 3235–3244. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00330 
[70] Youngjung Kim, Hyungjoo Jung, Dongbo Min, and Kwanghoon Sohn. 2018. Deep monocular depth estimation via integration of global 
and local predictions. IEEE transactions on Image Processing 27, 8 (2018), 4131–4144.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  31 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
[71] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C 
Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. 2023. Segment anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 4015–4026. 
[72] Johannes Kopf, Xuejian Rong, and Jia Bin Huang. 2021. Robust Consistent Video Depth Estimation. Proceedings of the IEEE computer 
society conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00166 
[73] Dimce Kostadinov and Zoran Ivanovski. 2012. Single image depth estimation using local gradient-based features. In 2012 19th 
International Conference on Systems, Signals and Image Processing (IWSSIP). IEEE, 596–599. 
[74] Jogendra Nath Kundu, Phani Krishna Uppala, Anuj Pahuja, and R Venkatesh Babu. 2018. Adadepth: Unsupervised content congruent 
adaptation for depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2656–2665. 
[75] Yevhen Kuznietsov, Marc Proesmans, and Luc Van Gool. 2021. Comoda: Continuous monocular depth adaptation using past experiences. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 2907–2917. 
[76] Yevhen Kuznietsov, Jorg Stuckler, and Bastian Leibe. 2017. Semi-supervised deep learning for monocular depth map prediction. In IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 6647–6655. 
[77] Hamid Laga, Laurent Valentin Jospin, Farid Boussaid, and Mohammed Bennamoun. 2020. A survey on deep learning techniques for 
stereo-based depth estimation. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 44, 4 (2020), 1738–1764. 
[78] Iro Laina, Christian Rupprecht, Vasileios Belagiannis, Federico Tombari, and Nassir Navab. 2016. Deeper depth prediction with fully 
convolutional residual networks. In 2016 Fourth international conference on 3D vision (3DV). IEEE, 239–248. 
[79] Jin Han Lee, Myung-Kyu Han, Dong Wook Ko, and Il Hong Suh. 2019. From big to small: Multi-scale local planar guidance for 
monocular depth estimation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.10326 (2019). 
[80] Jae-Han Lee, Minhyeok Heo, Kyung-Rae Kim, and Chang-Su Kim. 2018. Single-image depth estimation based on fourier domain 
analysis. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 330–339. 
[81] Minhyeok Lee, Sangwon Hwang, Chaewon Park, and Sangyoun Lee. 2022. EdgeConv with Attention Module for Monocular Depth 
Estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 2858–2867. 
[82] Zeyu Lei, Yan Wang, Zijian Li, and Junyao Yang. 2021. Attention based multilayer feature fusion convolutional neural network for 
unsupervised monocular depth estimation. Neurocomputing 423 (2021), 343–352. 
[83] Bo Li, Chunhua Shen, Yuchao Dai, Anton Van Den Hengel, and Mingyi He. 2015. Depth and surface normal estimation from monocular 
images using regression on deep features and hierarchical crfs. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 1119–1127. 
[84] Ruibo Li, Ke Xian, Chunhua Shen, Zhiguo Cao, Hao Lu, and Lingxiao Hang. 2018. Deep attention-based classification network for 
robust depth prediction. In Asian Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 663–678. 
[85] Zhengqi Li and Noah Snavely. 2018. Megadepth: Learning single-view depth prediction from internet photos. In IEEE conference on 
computer vision and pattern recognition. 2041–2050. 
[86] Yiyi Liao, Jun Xie, and Andreas Geiger. 2022. KITTI-360: A novel dataset and benchmarks for urban scene understanding in 2d and 3d. 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2022). 
[87] Julian Lienen, Eyke Hullermeier, Ralph Ewerth, and Nils Nommensen. 2021. Monocular depth estimation via listwise ranking using the 
plackett-luce model. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 14595–14604. 
[88] Jingyu Lin, Xiangyang Ji, Wenli Xu, and Qionghai Dai. 2013. Absolute depth estimation from a single defocused image. IEEE Transactions 
on Image Processing 22, 11 (2013), 4545–4550. 
[89] Chuanwu Ling, Xiaogang Zhang, and Hua Chen. 2021. Unsupervised monocular depth estimation using attention and multi-warp 
reconstruction. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia (2021). 
[90] Fayao Liu, Chunhua Shen, and Guosheng Lin. 2015. Deep convolutional neural fields for depth estimation from a single image. In IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 5162–5170. 
[91] Fayao Liu, Chunhua Shen, Guosheng Lin, and Ian Reid. 2015. Learning depth from single monocular images using deep convolutional 
neural fields. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 38, 10 (2015), 2024–2039. 
[92] Jing Liu, Xiaona Zhang, Zhaoxin Li, and Tianlu Mao. 2021. Multi-scale residual pyramid attention network for monocular depth 
estimation. In 2020 25th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR). IEEE, 5137–5144. 
[93] Lina Liu, Xibin Song, Mengmeng Wang, Yong Liu, and Liangjun Zhang. 2021. Self-supervised monocular depth estimation for all day 
images using domain separation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 12737–12746. 
[94] Miaomiao Liu, Mathieu Salzmann, and Xuming He. 2014. Discrete-continuous depth estimation from a single image. In IEEE conference 
on computer vision and pattern recognition. 716–723. 
[95] Peng Liu, Zonghua Zhang, Zhaozong Meng, and Nan Gao. 2020. Joint attention mechanisms for monocular depth estimation with 
multi-scale convolutions and adaptive weight adjustment. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 184437–184450. 
[96] Wu Liu and Tao Mei. 2022. Recent Advances of Monocular 2D and 3D Human Pose Estimation: A Deep Learning Perspective. ACM 
Computing Surveys (CSUR) (2022). 
[97] Shing Yan Loo, Moein Shakeri, Sai Hong Tang, Syamsiah Mashohor, and Hong Zhang. 2021. Online Mutual Adaptation of Deep Depth 
Prediction and Visual SLAM. CoRR (2021).

32  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
[98] Ivan Lopes, Tuan-Hung Vu, and Raoul de Charette. 2023. Cross-task attention mechanism for dense multi-task learning. In Proceedings 
of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 2329–2338. 
[99] Xuan Luo, Jia-Bin Huang, Richard Szeliski, Kevin Matzen, and Johannes Kopf. 2020. Consistent video depth estimation. ACM 
Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 39, 4 (2020), 71–1. 
[100]  Poggi M. 2020. Learning and Understanding Single Image Depth Estimation in the Wild. https://drive.google.com/file/d/17Bzlj_KZTXD_ 
WheehKNup7f9BY5_BdHK/view 
[101] Will Maddern, Geoffrey Pascoe, Chris Linegar, and Paul Newman. 2017. 1 year, 1000 km: The Oxford RobotCar dataset. The International 
Journal of Robotics Research 36, 1 (2017), 3–15. 
[102] Michele Mancini, Gabriele Costante, Paolo Valigi, Thomas A Ciarfuglia, Jeffrey Delmerico, and Davide Scaramuzza. 2017. Toward 
domain independence for learning-based monocular depth estimation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 2, 3 (2017), 1778–1785. 
[103] Dmitrii Maslov and Ilya Makarov. 2020. Online supervised attention-based recurrent depth estimation from monocular video. PeerJ 
Computer Science 6 (2020), e317. 
[104] Nikolaus Mayer, Eddy Ilg, Philip Hausser, Philipp Fischer, Daniel Cremers, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Brox. 2016. A large dataset 
to train convolutional networks for disparity, optical flow, and scene flow estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern 
recognition. 4040–4048. 
[105] Moritz Menze and Andreas Geiger. 2015. Object scene flow for autonomous vehicles. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern 
recognition. 3061–3070. 
[106] S. H.Mahdi Miangoleh, Sebastian Dille, Long Mai, Sylvain Paris, and Yagız Aksoy. 2021. Boosting Monocular Depth Estimation Models 
to High-resolution via Content-adaptive Multi-Resolution Merging. Proceedings of the IEEE computer society conference on computer 
vision and pattern recognition. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00956 
[107] Yue Ming, Xuyang Meng, Chunxiao Fan, and Hui Yu. 2021. Deep learning for monocular depth estimation: A review. Neurocomputing 
438 (2021), 14–33. 
[108] Lawrence Mutimbu and Antonio Robles-Kelly. 2013. A relaxed factorial Markov random field for colour and depth estimation from a 
single foggy image. In 2013 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing. IEEE, 355–359. 
[109] Taher Naderi, Amir Sadovnik, Jason Hayward, and Hairong Qi. 2022. Monocular Depth Estimation with Adaptive Geometric Attention. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 944–954. 
[110] Muhammad Muzammal Naseer, Kanchana Ranasinghe, Salman H Khan, Munawar Hayat, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and Ming-Hsuan Yang. 
2021. Intriguing properties of vision transformers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), 23296–23308. 
[111]  Zhaoyang Niu, Guoqiang Zhong, and Hui Yu. 2021. A review on the attention mechanism of deep learning. Neurocomputing 452 (2021), 
48–62. 
[112] Vaishakh Patil, Wouter Van Gansbeke, Dengxin Dai, and Luc Van Gool. 2020. Don’t forget the past: Recurrent depth estimation from 
monocular video. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5, 4 (2020), 6813–6820. 
[113] Rui Peng, Ronggang Wang, Yawen Lai, Luyang Tang, and Yangang Cai. 2021. Excavating the Potential Capacity of Self-Supervised 
Monocular Depth Estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 15560–15569. 
[114] Andra Petrovai and Sergiu Nedevschi. 2022. Exploiting Pseudo Labels in a Self-Supervised Learning Framework for Improved Monocular 
Depth Estimation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 1578–1588. 
[115] Luigi Piccinelli, Christos Sakaridis, and Fisher Yu. 2023. iDisc: Internal discretization for monocular depth estimation. In Proceedings of 
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 21477–21487. 
[116] Sudeep Pillai, Rareş Ambruş, and Adrien Gaidon. 2019. SuperDepth: Self-Supervised, Super-Resolved Monocular Depth Estimation. In 
2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). 9250–9256. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA.2019.8793621 
[117] Andrea Pilzer, Dan Xu, Mihai Puscas, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. 2018. Unsupervised adversarial depth estimation using cycled 
generative networks. In 2018 international conference on 3D vision (3DV). IEEE, 587–595. 
[118] Giovanni Pintore, Marco Agus, Eva Almansa, Jens Schneider, and Enrico Gobbetti. 2021. SliceNet: deep dense depth estimation from a 
single indoor panorama using a slice-based representation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 11536–11545. 
[119] Matteo Poggi, Fabio Tosi, Konstantinos Batsos, Philippos Mordohai, and Stefano Mattoccia. 2021. On the synergies between machine 
learning and binocular stereo for depth estimation from images: a survey. IEEE trans. on pattern anal. and machine intelligence (2021). 
[120] Matteo Poggi, Fabio Tosi, and Stefano Mattoccia. 2018. Learning monocular depth estimation with unsupervised trinocular assumptions. 
In 2018 international conference on 3D vision (3DV). IEEE, 324–333. 
[121] Mahsa T Pourazad, Panos Nasiopoulos, and Ali Bashashati. 2010. Random forests-based 2D-to-3D video conversion. In 2010 17th IEEE 
International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems. IEEE, 150–153. 
[122] Mihai Marian Puscas, Dan Xu, Andrea Pilzer, and Niculae Sebe. 2019. Structured coupled generative adversarial networks for 
unsupervised monocular depth estimation. In 2019 international conference on 3D vision (3DV). IEEE, 18–26. 
[123] Zequn Qin and Xi Li. 2022. MonoGround: Detecting Monocular 3D Objects From the Ground. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition. 3793–3802.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  33 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
[124] Michael Ramamonjisoa and Vincent Lepetit. 2019. Sharpnet: Fast and accurate recovery of occluding contours in monocular depth 
estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops. 0–0. 
[125] René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. 2021. Vision transformers for dense prediction. In IEEE conference on computer 
vision and pattern recognition. 12179–12188. 
[126]  René Ranftl, Katrin Lasinger, David Hafner, Konrad Schindler, and Vladlen Koltun. 2020. Towards robust monocular depth estimation: 
Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 44, 3 (2020), 
1623–1637. 
[127] Rene Ranftl, Vibhav Vineet, Qifeng Chen, and Vladlen Koltun. 2016. Dense monocular depth estimation in complex dynamic scenes. In 
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 4058–4066. 
[128] Haoyu Ren, Aman Raj, Mostafa El-Khamy, and Jungwon Lee. 2020. Suw-learn: Joint supervised, unsupervised, weakly supervised deep 
learning for monocular depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition Workshops. 750–751. 
[129] Vamshi Krishna Repala and Shiv Ram Dubey. 2019. Dual CNN models for unsupervised monocular depth estimation. In International 
Conference on Pattern Recognition and Machine Intelligence. Springer, 209–217. 
[130] Manuel Rey-Area, Mingze Yuan, and Christian Richardt. 2022. 360monodepth: High-resolution 360deg monocular depth estimation. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 3762–3772. 
[131] Tom Roussel, Luc Van Eycken, and Tinne Tuytelaars. 2019. Monocular depth estimation in new environments with absolute scale. In 
2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 1735–1741. 
[132] Anirban Roy and Sinisa Todorovic. 2016. Monocular depth estimation using neural regression forest. In IEEE conference on computer 
vision and pattern recognition. 5506–5514. 
[133] Abhinav Sagar. 2022. Monocular depth estimation using multi scale neural network and feature fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. 656–662. 
[134] Ashutosh Saxena, Sung Chung, and Andrew Ng. 2005. Learning Depth from Single Monocular Images. In Advances in neural information 
processing systems, Y. Weiss, B. Schölkopf, and J. Platt (Eds.), Vol. 18. MIT Press. 
[135] Ashutosh Saxena, Min Sun, and Andrew Y Ng. 2008. Make3d: Learning 3d scene structure from a single still image. IEEE transactions 
on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 31, 5 (2008), 824–840. 
[136] Saurabh Saxena, Charles Herrmann, Junhwa Hur, Abhishek Kar, Mohammad Norouzi, Deqing Sun, and David J Fleet. 2024. The 
surprising effectiveness of diffusion models for optical flow and monocular depth estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing 
Systems 36 (2024). 
[137] Daniel Scharstein, Heiko Hirschmüller, York Kitajima, Greg Krathwohl, Nera Nešić, Xi Wang, and Porter Westling. 2014. High-resolution 
stereo datasets with subpixel-accurate ground truth. In German conference on pattern recognition. Springer, 31–42. 
[138] Thomas Schops, Johannes L Schonberger, Silvano Galliani, Torsten Sattler, Konrad Schindler, Marc Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger. 
2017. A multi-view stereo benchmark with high-resolution images and multi-camera videos. In IEEE conference on computer vision and 
pattern recognition. 3260–3269. 
[139] David Schubert, Thore Goll, Nikolaus Demmel, Vladyslav Usenko, Jörg Stückler, and Daniel Cremers. 2018. The TUM VI benchmark for 
evaluating visual-inertial odometry. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 1680–1687. 
[140] Shuwei Shao, Zhongcai Pei, Xingming Wu, Zhong Liu, Weihai Chen, and Zhengguo Li. 2024. Iebins: Iterative elastic bins for monocular 
depth estimation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2024). 
[141] Nathan Silberman, Derek Hoiem, Pushmeet Kohli, and Rob Fergus. 2012. Indoor segmentation and support inference from rgbd images. 
In European conference on computer vision. Springer, 746–760. 
[142] Eunjin Son and Sang Jun Lee. 2024. CaBins: CLIP-based Adaptive Bins for Monocular Depth Estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 4557–4567. 
[143] Shuran Song, Fisher Yu, Andy Zeng, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, and Thomas Funkhouser. 2017. Semantic scene completion from a 
single depth image. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 1746–1754. 
[144] Wenfeng Song, Shuai Li, Ji Liu, Aimin Hao, Qinping Zhao, and Hong Qin. 2019. Contextualized CNN for scene-aware depth estimation 
from single RGB image. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 22, 5 (2019), 1220–1233. 
[145] Xibin Song, Wei Li, Dingfu Zhou, Yuchao Dai, Jin Fang, Hongdong Li, and Liangjun Zhang. 2021. MLDA-Net: Multi-level dual 
attention-based network for self-supervised monocular depth estimation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 30 (2021), 4691–4705. 
[146] Jürgen Sturm, Nikolas Engelhard, Felix Endres, Wolfram Burgard, and Daniel Cremers. 2012. A benchmark for the evaluation of RGB-D 
SLAM systems. In IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems. IEEE, 573–580. 
[147]  Wen Su and Haifeng Zhang. 2020. Soft regression of monocular depth using scale-semantic exchange network. IEEE Access 8 (2020), 
114930–114939. 
[148] Wen Su, Haifeng Zhang, Quan Zhou, Wenzhen Yang, and Zengfu Wang. 2020. Monocular depth estimation using information exchange 
network. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 22, 6 (2020), 3491–3503. 
[149] Libo Sun, Jia-Wang Bian, Huangying Zhan, Wei Yin, Ian Reid, and Chunhua Shen. 2023. Sc-depthv3: Robust self-supervised monocular 
depth estimation for dynamic scenes. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2023).

34  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
[150] K Swaraja, V Akshitha, K Pranav, B Vyshnavi, V Sai Akhil, K Meenakshi, Padmavathi Kora, Himabindu Valiveti, and Chaitanya 
Duggineni. 2021. Monocular Depth Estimation using Transfer learning-An Overview. In E3S Web of Conferences, Vol. 309. EDP Sciences. 
[151] Dong Tian, Po-Lin Lai, Patrick Lopez, and Cristina Gomila. 2009. View synthesis techniques for 3D video. In Applications of Digital 
Image Processing XXXII, Vol. 7443. SPIE, 233–243. 
[152] Hu Tian and Fei Li. 2019. Semi-supervised depth estimation from a single image based on confidence learning. In ICASSP 2019-2019 
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP). IEEE, 8573–8577. 
[153] Fabio Tosi, Filippo Aleotti, Matteo Poggi, and Stefano Mattoccia. 2019. Learning monocular depth estimation infusing traditional stereo 
knowledge. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 9799–9809. 
[154] Benjamin Ummenhofer, Huizhong Zhou, Jonas Uhrig, Nikolaus Mayer, Eddy Ilg, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Thomas Brox. 2017. Demon: 
Depth and motion network for learning monocular stereo. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 5038–5047. 
[155] Yannick Verdié, Jifei Song, Barnabé Mas, Benjamin Busam, Ales Leonardis, and Steven McDonagh. 2022. CroMo: Cross-Modal Learning 
for Monocular Depth Estimation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 3937–3947. 
[156] Pulkit Vyas, Chirag Saxena, Anwesh Badapanda, and Anurag Goswami. 2022. Outdoor Monocular Depth Estimation: A Research 
Review. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01399 (2022). 
[157] Brandon Wagstaff and Jonathan Kelly. 2021. Self-supervised scale recovery for monocular depth and egomotion estimation. In 2021 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2620–2627. 
[158]  Matthew Wallingford, Hao Li, Alessandro Achille, Avinash Ravichandran, Charless Fowlkes, Rahul Bhotika, and Stefano Soatto. 2022. 
Task adaptive parameter sharing for multi-task learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 
Recognition. 7561–7570. 
[159] Guangming Wang, Chi Zhang, Hesheng Wang, Jingchuan Wang, Yong Wang, and Xinlei Wang. 2020. Unsupervised learning of depth, 
optical flow and pose with occlusion from 3d geometry. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23, 1 (2020), 308–320. 
[160] Lijun Wang, Jianming Zhang, Oliver Wang, Zhe Lin, and Huchuan Lu. 2020. Sdc-depth: Semantic divide-and-conquer network for 
monocular depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 541–550. 
[161] Qin Wang, Dengxin Dai, Lukas Hoyer, Luc Van Gool, and Olga Fink. 2021. Domain adaptive semantic segmentation with self-supervised 
depth estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 8515–8525. 
[162]  Rui Wang, Stephen M Pizer, and Jan-Michael Frahm. 2019. Recurrent neural network for (un-) supervised learning of monocular video 
visual odometry and depth. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 5555–5564. 
[163] Ruoyu Wang, Zehao Yu, and Shenghua Gao. 2023. PlaneDepth: Self-supervised depth estimation via orthogonal planes. In Proceedings 
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 21425–21434. 
[164] Jamie Watson, Michael Firman, Gabriel J Brostow, and Daniyar Turmukhambetov. 2019. Self-supervised monocular depth hints. In 
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2162–2171. 
[165] Jamie Watson, Oisin Mac Aodha, Victor Prisacariu, Gabriel Brostow, and Michael Firman. 2021. The temporal opportunist: Self- 
supervised multi-frame monocular depth. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 1164–1174. 
[166] Changhee Won, Jongbin Ryu, and Jongwoo Lim. 2019. Omnimvs: End-to-end learning for omnidirectional stereo matching. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 8987–8996. 
[167] Sanghyun Woo, Jongchan Park, Joon-Young Lee, and In So Kweon. 2018. Cbam: Convolutional block attention module. In Proceedings 
of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 3–19. 
[168] Zhihao Xia, Patrick Sullivan, and Ayan Chakrabarti. 2020. Generating and exploiting probabilistic monocular depth estimates. In IEEE 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 65–74. 
[169] Jianxiong Xiao, Andrew Owens, and Antonio Torralba. 2013. Sun3d: A database of big spaces reconstructed using sfm and object labels. 
In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 1625–1632. 
[170] Ruan Xiaogang, Yan Wenjing, Huang Jing, Guo Peiyuan, and Guo Wei. 2020. Monocular depth estimation based on deep learning: A 
survey. In 2020 Chinese Automation Congress (CAC). IEEE, 2436–2440. 
[171] Junyuan Xie, Ross Girshick, and Ali Farhadi. 2016. Deep3d: Fully automatic 2d-to-3d video conversion with deep convolutional neural 
networks. In European conference on computer vision. Springer, 842–857. 
[172] Dan Xu, Elisa Ricci, Wanli Ouyang, Xiaogang Wang, and Nicu Sebe. 2017. Multi-scale continuous crfs as sequential deep networks for 
monocular depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 5354–5362. 
[173] Dan Xu, Elisa Ricci, Wanli Ouyang, Xiaogang Wang, and Nicu Sebe. 2019. Monocular Depth Estimation Using Multi-Scale Continuous 
CRFs as Sequential Deep Networks. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 41 (2019). Issue 6. 
[174] Dan Xu, Wei Wang, Hao Tang, Hong Liu, Nicu Sebe, and Elisa Ricci. 2018. Structured attention guided convolutional neural fields for 
monocular depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 3917–3925. 
[175] Jialei Xu, Yuanchao Bai, Xianming Liu, Junjun Jiang, and Xiangyang Ji. 2021. Weakly-Supervised Monocular Depth Estimationwith 
Resolution-Mismatched Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.11573 (2021). 
[176] Xianfa Xu, Zhe Chen, and Fuliang Yin. 2021. Monocular depth estimation with multi-scale feature fusion. IEEE Signal Processing Letters 
28 (2021), 678–682.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  35 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
[177] Xianfa Xu, Zhe Chen, and Fuliang Yin. 2021. Multi-scale spatial attention-guided monocular depth estimation with semantic enhance- 
ment. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 30 (2021), 8811–8822. 
[178] Yufan Xu, Yan Wang, Rui Huang, Zeyu Lei, Junyao Yang, and Zijian Li. 2022. Unsupervised Learning of Depth Estimation and Camera 
Pose With Multi-Scale GANs. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems 23, 10 (2022), 17039–17047. 
[179] Jiaxing Yan, Hong Zhao, Penghui Bu, and YuSheng Jin. 2021. Channel-Wise Attention-Based Network for Self-Supervised Monocular 
Depth Estimation. In 2021 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV). IEEE, 464–473. 
[180] Gengshan Yang, Joshua Manela, Michael Happold, and Deva Ramanan. 2019. Hierarchical deep stereo matching on high-resolution 
images. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 5515–5524. 
[181] Guorun Yang, Xiao Song, Chaoqin Huang, Zhidong Deng, Jianping Shi, and Bolei Zhou. 2019. Drivingstereo: A large-scale dataset for 
stereo matching in autonomous driving scenarios. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 899–908. 
[182] Guanglei Yang, Hao Tang, Mingli Ding, Nicu Sebe, and Elisa Ricci. 2021. Transformer-based attention networks for continuous 
pixel-wise prediction. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 16269–16279. 
[183] Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Xiaogang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. 2024. Depth anything: Unleashing the power 
of large-scale unlabeled data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10891 (2024). 
[184] Nan Yang, Rui Wang, Jorg Stuckler, and Daniel Cremers. 2018. Deep virtual stereo odometry: Leveraging deep depth prediction for 
monocular direct sparse odometry. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision. 817–833. 
[185] Xin Yang, Qingling Chang, Xinglin Liu, Siyuan He, and Yan Cui. 2021. Monocular Depth Estimation Based on Multi-Scale Depth Map 
Fusion. IEEE Access 9 (2021), 67696–67705. 
[186] Xin Yang, Yang Gao, Hongcheng Luo, Chunyuan Liao, and Kwang-Ting Cheng. 2019. Bayesian denet: Monocular depth prediction and 
frame-wise fusion with synchronized uncertainty. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 21, 11 (2019), 2701–2713. 
[187] Xin Yang, Hongcheng Luo, Yuhao Wu, Yang Gao, Chunyuan Liao, and Kwang-Ting Cheng. 2019. Reactive obstacle avoidance of 
monocular quadrotors with online adapted depth prediction network. Neurocomputing 325 (2019), 142–158. 
[188] Xiaodong Yang, Zhuang Ma, Zhiyu Ji, and Zhe Ren. 2023. Gedepth: Ground embedding for monocular depth estimation. In Proceedings 
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. 12719–12727. 
[189] Xinchen Ye, Xin Fan, Mingliang Zhang, Rui Xu, and Wei Zhong. 2021. Unsupervised Monocular Depth Estimation via Recursive Stereo 
Distillation. IEEE transactions on image processing 30 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2021.3072215 
[190] Xinchen Ye, Mingliang Zhang, Rui Xu, Wei Zhong, Xin Fan, Zhu Liu, and Jiaao Zhang. 2019. Unsupervised Monocular depth estimation 
based on dual attention mechanism and depth-aware loss. In International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME). IEEE, 169–174. 
[191] Wan Yingcai, Fang Lijing, and Zhao Qiankun. 2019. Multi-scale Deep CNN Network for Unsupervised Monocular Depth Estimation. In 
IEEE Annual International Conference on CYBER Technology in Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems. IEEE, 469–473. 
[192] Mehmet Kerim Yucel, Valia Dimaridou, Anastasios Drosou, and Albert Saa-Garriga. 2021. Real-time monocular depth estimation with 
sparse supervision on mobile. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 2428–2437. 
[193] Pierluigi Zama Ramirez, Matteo Poggi, Fabio Tosi, Stefano Mattoccia, and Luigi Di Stefano. 2018. Geometry meets semantics for 
semi-supervised monocular depth estimation. In Asian Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 298–313. 
[194] Huangying Zhan, Ravi Garg, Chamara Saroj Weerasekera, Kejie Li, Harsh Agarwal, and Ian M. Reid. 2018. Unsupervised Learning 
of Monocular Depth Estimation and Visual Odometry with Deep Feature Reconstruction. Proceedings of the IEEE computer society 
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00043 
[195] Haokui Zhang, Chunhua Shen, Ying Li, Yuanzhouhan Cao, Yu Liu, and Youliang Yan. 2019. Exploiting temporal consistency for 
real-time video depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 1725–1734. 
[196] Mingliang Zhang, Xinchen Ye, and Xin Fan. 2020. Unsupervised detail-preserving network for high quality monocular depth estimation. 
Neurocomputing 404 (2020), 1–13. 
[197]  Ning Zhang, Francesco Nex, George Vosselman, and Norman Kerle. 2023. Lite-mono: A lightweight cnn and transformer architecture 
for self-supervised monocular depth estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 
18537–18546. 
[198]  Zhoutong Zhang, Forrester Cole, Richard Tucker, William T Freeman, and Tali Dekel. 2021. Consistent depth of moving objects in 
video. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 4 (2021), 1–12. 
[199] Zhenyu Zhang, Zhen Cui, Chunyan Xu, Zequn Jie, Xiang Li, and Jian Yang. 2018. Joint task-recursive learning for semantic segmentation 
and depth estimation. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision. 235–251. 
[200] Zhenyu Zhang, Stephane Lathuiliere, Elisa Ricci, Nicu Sebe, Yan Yan, and Jian Yang. 2020. Online depth learning against forgetting in 
monocular videos. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 4494–4503. 
[201]  Ziyu Zhang, Alexander G Schwing, Sanja Fidler, and Raquel Urtasun. 2015. Monocular object instance segmentation and depth ordering 
with cnns. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 2614–2622. 
[202]  Chaoqiang Zhao, Qiyu Sun, Chongzhen Zhang, Yang Tang, and Feng Qian. 2020. Monocular depth estimation based on deep learning: 
An overview. Science China Technological Sciences 63, 9 (2020), 1612–1627.

36  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
 
[203] Chaoqiang Zhao, Gary G Yen, Qiyu Sun, Chongzhen Zhang, and Yang Tang. 2020. Masked GAN for unsupervised depth and pose 
prediction with scale consistency. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 32, 12 (2020), 5392–5403. 
[204] Shanshan Zhao, Huan Fu, Mingming Gong, and Dacheng Tao. 2019. Geometry-aware symmetric domain adaptation for monocular 
depth estimation. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 9788–9798. 
[205] Shiyu Zhao, Lin Zhang, Ying Shen, Shengjie Zhao, and Huijuan Zhang. 2019. Super-resolution for monocular depth estimation with 
multi-scale sub-pixel convolutions and a smoothness constraint. IEEE Access 7 (2019), 16323–16335. 
[206] Yunhan Zhao, Shu Kong, Daeyun Shin, and Charless Fowlkes. 2020. Domain decluttering: Simplifying images to mitigate synthetic-real 
domain shift and improve depth estimation. In Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 3330–3340. 
[207] Chuanxia Zheng, Tat-Jen Cham, and Jianfei Cai. 2018. T2net: Synthetic-to-realistic translation for solving single-image depth estimation 
tasks. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 767–783. 
[208] Tinghui Zhou, Matthew Brown, Noah Snavely, and David G Lowe. 2017. Unsupervised learning of depth and ego-motion from video. 
In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 1851–1858. 
[209] Yakun Zhou, Jinting Luo, Musen Hu, Tingyong Wu, Jinkuan Zhu, Xingzhong Xiong, and Jienan Chen. 2022. Learning Depth Estimation 
From Memory Infusing Monocular Cues: A Generalization Prediction Approach. IEEE Access 10 (2022), 21359–21369. 
[210] Zhongkai Zhou, Xinnan Fan, Pengfei Shi, and Yuanxue Xin. 2021. R-MSFM: Recurrent Multi-Scale Feature Modulation for Monocular 
Depth Estimating. In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 12777–12786. 
[211] Wei Zhuo, Mathieu Salzmann, Xuming He, and Miaomiao Liu. 2015. Indoor scene structure analysis for single image depth estimation. 
In IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 614–622. 
[212] Daniel Zoran, Phillip Isola, Dilip Krishnan, and William T Freeman. 2015. Learning ordinal relationships for mid-level vision. In 
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision. 388–396. 
[213] Yuliang Zou, Zelun Luo, and Jia-Bin Huang. 2018. Df-net: Unsupervised joint learning of depth and flow using cross-task consistency. 
In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). 36–53.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  1 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
Appendix A: Supplementary Materials (e-Pub only) 
A DEPTH SENSING TECHNIQUES USED IN DATASETS 
A depth dataset contains RGB-D data (the RGB images and their corresponding ground-truth depth data). 
Following are the two active depth sensing techniques to acquire ground-truth depth data for real world scenes. 
• Time of Flight (ToF): ToF measures the time taken for a light wave to travel from the sensor to the object 
and back. ToF sends a pulse to measure depth. However, interference from other waves in the natural 
setting can result in noisy output. Otherwise, the output is more accurate than that of LiDAR. 
• Light Detection Range Sensor (LiDAR): This optical sensing technique measures depth using the time 
taken to reflect the light from the object’s surface. Using a laser or LED, the sensor emits infrared light to 
the object’s surface. LiDAR sensors have an extensive range of sensing compared to ToF. LiDAR takes less 
time to calculate the distance. Different settings allow multiple pulses and different wavelengths depending 
on the application. 
Two common drawbacks of the techniques mentioned above are the limited range and less accurate results on 
peculiar objects with shiny or transparent surfaces [24]. Another factor is that recent cameras capture RGB 
images from passive sensors, while active sensors capture the corresponding depth maps. Hence, the spatial 
resolution of RGB and depth maps do not always match. RGB images are often available in high resolution, while 
depth maps are in low resolution [175]. This issue makes the training process difficult. 
B 
GENERIC SELF-SUPERVISED TRAINING PROCESS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
View 1 
 
 
 
Estimated 
Disparity 
 
 
View 2 
 
 
 
Synthesised 
view 
Loss 
function 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Target view 
Step 1: Image re-projection 
Step 2: Loss minimization 
 
Fig. 10.  Self-supervised generic training procedure. 
 
 
C SUMMARY OF THE METHODS INCLUDED FOR THE SURVEY

Continued on next page 
 
Rajapaksha, et al. 
Table 2. Summary of selected research work for monocular depth estimation. The abbreviations follow the taxonomy presented in the paper. 
 
 
Ref. 
Year 
Runtime 
input 
Training input 
Archit. 
Atten. 
Segme. 
Adapta. Multi- 
Scale 
Superv. Dataset 
Key Contribution 
Classification 
based on the 
taxonomy 
 
 
[55] 
2024 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono 
video 
Mono 
video 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono images 
Mono videos 
Mono images 
Mono videos 
Mono images 
Mono videos 
Mono image 
Mono video 
Mono image 
Mono images 
Mono videos 
Mono images , GT 
depth 
Mono images , GT 
depth 
Stereo videos 
Mono video 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono videos 
Mono videos 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono videos 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mon videos 
Stereo images 
ResNet- 
CLIP 
U-Net 
ConvGated 
RU 
ResNet 
latent- 
based 
CNN-ViT 
CNN 
CNN 
U-Net 
CNN-ViT 
CNN-ViT 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN 
U-Net 
RNN 
CNN - FPN 
CNN- 
LSTM 
U-Net 
GAN 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN-GRU 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
KITTI, NYU-V2 
KITTI, Flying-Things, 
Kubric, Autoflow, Tar- 
tanAir 
KITTI, NYU-V2, SUN- 
RGBD 
KITTI, DDAD, TUM, 
NYU-V2 
KITTI, 
DDAD, 
NuScenes 
KITTI, Make3D 
KITTI, NYU-V2 Argo- 
verse, DDAD 
NuScenes, Oxford ro- 
bot car 
KITTI, SUN3D, RGBD, 
MVS, Scenes11, Ox- 
ford robot car 
KITTI 
KITTI, Make3D, NYU- 
V2 
KITTI NYU V2 
Make3D, KITTI, NYU 
V2 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
NYU V2, KITTI 
KITTI 
CroMo 
KITTI 
KITTI, Cityscapes 
KITTI, NYU V2 
KITTI, Make3D 
NYU V2 
KITTI, NYU V2 
KITTI 
KITTI, Make3D 
Contrastive language image pre-training for few-shot learn- 
ing of depth. 
Using diffusion models for depth and optical-flow estimation. 
Classification-regression using elastic bins. 
self-supervised training for dynamic scenes using pre-trained 
pseudo depth estimation network. 
Zero-shot learning with latent representations for geometric 
embeddings. 
A light-weight architecture to extract multi-scale local fea- 
tures and attention based long-range features. 
Incorporating implicitly learned high-level pat- 
terns(discretization) within input for accurate depth. 
depth under challenging conditions with adversarial train- 
ing. 
CNN-transformer hybrid network. 
Evaluated the generalization ability of self-supervised meth- 
ods using adaptive feature fusion. 
Data augmentation and multi-scale feature fusion method 
to estimate scale invariant scene depth. 
Monocular depth estimation guided with geometric structure 
during supervision. 
Multi scale feature fusion based monocular depth estimation. 
Semi-supervised learning with mutual distillation. 
Recurrent modulation unit and residual upsampling for sin- 
gle image depth. 
Edge convolution for learning structural information related 
to depth. 
Use of monocular cues by extracting and storing object fea- 
ture vectors as a memory. 
Use of multi-modal data during 3D supervision. 
Multi-scale gans for self supervised monocular depth esti- 
mation. 
Hybrid of self-supervised reprojection and multi-view cost 
volume matching for training. 
Training based on resolution mismatched supervision. 
Use of channel-wsie attention during self-supervised train- 
ing. 
Adaptive fusion of multi-scale depth maps. 
Attention based multi scale feature fusion pyramid network. 
Estimating depth while maintaining semantic rich feature 
fusion. 
Multi-scale spatial attention. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TMV; 
RMI; 
FCN; (3DS, SLS); 
(MV,SV). 
TMI; RMI; CL; 3DS; 
SV. 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
WS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; 3DS; SV. 
TMV; RMI; VC; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TMV; RMV; FCN; 
(3DS,SLS); MV. 
TMI; RMV; VC; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; VC; SLS; 
SV. 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
FCN; 3DS; SV. 
TSV; RMI; FCN; 
SMS; SV. 
TMV. RMI; RWOA; 
OL; FL. SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
SV. 
TMI; RMI; 3DS; CL. 
SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS. 
TMV; RMI; VG; 
SLS; SV. 
TMV; FCN; SLS; 
SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
WS; SV. 
TMV; RMI FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
DS; 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
[136] 
2024 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
and 
[140] 
2024 
N 
N 
N 
N 
self 
3D 
[149] 
2024 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
Weakly 
[47] 
2023 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
[197] 
2023 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
[115] 
2023 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
[40] 
2023 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
and 
[8] 
2022 
Y 
Patch- 
based 
N 
Self 
Self 
[7] 
2022 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
[52] 
2022 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
[109] 
2022 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
[133] 
2022 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
[10] 
2022 
N 
N 
Y 
Semi 
[58] 
2022 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
[81] 
2022 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
[209] 
2022 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
3D 
[155] 
2022 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
[178] 
2022 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
[165] 
2021 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
[175] 
2021 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Weakly 
[179] 
2021 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
[185] 
2021 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
[176] 
2021 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
[210] 
2021 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
[177] 
2021 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
2 • 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX.

Table 2 – continued from previous page 
 
Continued on next page 
 
 
 
 
[157] 
2021 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono 
Video 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono 
video 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono 
videos 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Panaroma 
images 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono 
video 
Mono 
video 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono 
videos 
Mono videos 
Stereo pairs 
Mono videos with 
labeled data 
Mono images 
Mono Video 
Mono images 
Stereo image pairs 
Mono Video 
Synthetic 
data 
with GT 
Mono videos 
Stereo images 
Mono images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images , GT 
depth 
Stereo images 
Mono 
videos, 
sparse GT depth 
Stereo images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono video 
Mono video 
Mono video 
Stereo image pairs 
Mono images 
Mono video 
Mono Video 
Mono Images 
Mono videos 
CNN 
N 
Y 
Y 
N 
Self 
Oxford  robot  car, 
KITTI 
KITTI,  Cityscapes, 
Make3D 
SYNTHIA-to- 
Cityscapes 
NYU V2, KITTI 
ScanNet, RGBD 
NYU V2, KITTI 
DIML/CVL, KITTI 
EventScape, MVSEC 
Synthetic, PBN, KITTI 
TikTok 
Oxford robot car 
Middleberry, IBMS 
NYU V2 
their own data 
KITTI 
KITTI 
KITTI 
BuildingParser 
EuRoC, NYU V2, 7- 
Scenes 
MPI Sintel 
KITTI 
KITTI 
NYU V2 HC Depth 
Cityscapes,  KITTI, 
NuScenes 
FlyingThings3D, 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
NYU V2, ScanNet 
KITTI 
Joint training depth and ego-motion with scale recovery loss. 
Recursive stereo distillation via a mono network and a stereo 
network. 
Domain knowledge transferring from source to target do- 
main for adaptation. 
Global processing with adaptive depth bins. 
Multi-view feature fusion in temporal domain. 
Attention-based context aggregation, a classification model, 
soft inference to generate fine-grained depth. 
A transformer-based network that uses hierarchical repre- 
sentation. 
Confidence guided network with student-teacher strategy, 
DIML/CVL dataset. 
A framework that processes multi-modal input asyn- 
chronously using RNN. 
A framework that learns a structured representation to gen- 
eralize depth estimation. 
Reconstructing human body in motion using monocular 
depth estimation. 
Adaptation for day and night monocular depth estimation. 
Content adaptive multi-resolution merging. 
Multi scale attention based context aggregation module for 
CNNS. 
Online adaptation framework using visual SLAM. 
Two stage training strategy with ambiguity using coarse 
depth priors. 
Multi-level feature fusion with dual attention based network. 
Self-distillation in monocular depth estimation without using 
an additional network. 
Image slicing based architecture for indoor panaroma depth 
estimation. 
A novel depth factorization module to adapt to rapid scale 
changes. 
Geometrically consistent dense depth reconstruction. 
Adaptive depth and ego-motion estimation technique for on 
the fly learning. 
Optimising UNet architecture with attention. 
Spatial attention block-based network archi, edge-aware loss 
term. 
A CNN architecture for high resolution self supervision. 
A supervised loss, that minimizes reprojected distances in 
image space. 
Recurrent network to leverage spatiotemporal information. 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
OL; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; VC; 
3DS; SV. 
TMV; RMV 3DS; 
MV. 
TMI; RMI; AED; 
WS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; ViT; MI. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SMS; SV. 
TMV; RMV; FL. 
RMI; FCN; SMS; 
TMV; RMV; FCN; 
SMS; MV. 
TSI; RMI; CG; SLS; 
DT; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; MI. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; 
TMI; RMI; AED; 
OL; MI. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; SV. 
TMV; RMI; UN; 
SLS; SV. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; 3DS; 
CR; MI. 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; MV. 
TMV; RMV; FCN; 
SLS; Synthetic. 
TMV; RMV; OL; 
SV. 
TSI; RMI; AED; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
AED; WS; SV. 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TMV; 
RMI; 
FCN; 
SMS; 
(SV,Synthetic). 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
SV. 
TMV; OL; CL. MV. 
[189] 
2021 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
[161] 
2021 
CNN 
Y 
Y 
Y 
N 
Self 
[13] 
2021 
CNN-ViT 
Y 
N 
N 
3D 
[16] 
2021 
ViT 
Y 
N 
N 
3D 
[26] 
2021 
ResNet 
Y 
Y 
N 
Weakly 
[28] 
2021 
ViT 
Y 
Y 
[29] 
[41] 
2021 
2021 
CNN 
U-Net 
RNN 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Semi 
3D 
[25] 
2021 
CNN 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
Semi 
[60] 
2021 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Semi 
[93] 
2021 
Cycle GAN 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
[106] 
2021 
CNN 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
3D 
[92] 
[97] 
2021 
2021 
Pyramid 
CNN 
CNN 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
N 
3D 
3D 
[11] 
2021 
CNN 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
[145] 
2021 
CNN-UNet 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
[113] 
2021 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
[118] 
2021 
CNN-RNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
[62] 
2021 
CNN 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
[72] 
2021 
CNN 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
Self 
[75] 
[82] 
2021 
2021 
CNN 
U-Net 
FCN 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
Self 
[23] 
[45] 
2020 
2020 
CNN 
U-Net 
FCN 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
Weakly 
Self 
[46] 
2020 
FCN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Semi 
[59] 
2020 
CNN 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
3D 
[112] 
2020 
ConvLSTM 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
 
Ref. 
Year Runtime Training input 
input 
Archit. 
Atten.
Segme. Adapta. Multi- Superv. Datasets 
Scale 
Key Contribution 
Classification 
based on the 
taxonomy 
Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos 
• 3 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX.

Continued on next page 
 
4 
Rajapaksha, et al. 
 
 Table 2 – continued from previous page 
 
Ref. 
Year 
Runtime 
input 
Training input 
Archit. 
Atten. 
Segme. 
Adapta. Multi- 
Scale 
Superv. Datasets 
Key Contribution 
Classification 
based on the 
taxonomy 
 
 
[95] 
2020 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images , GT 
depth 
Monocular videos, 
GT depth 
Mono videos, GT 
depth 
Stereo image pairs 
Mono images 
Stereo images 
Stereo images 
Mono and syn- 
thetic images 
Mono videos 
Stereo images 
Mono images 
Mono videos 
Mono images, se- 
mantic labels 
Stereo image pairs 
Mono video 
Stereo videos 
Mono training 
Mono images 
sparse depth maps, 
Mono images 
Mono images , GT 
depth 
Stereo images 
Stereo images 
Stereo images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Stereo images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
CNN 
CNN 
ConvGated 
RU 
U-Net 
CNN U-net 
Conditional 
GAN 
CNN 
GAN 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN 
- 
CNN 
FCN 
CNN 
U-Net 
FCN 
CNN 
- 
DispNet 
CNN 
U-Net 
Cycle GAN 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN 
CNN 
GAN-CRF 
CNN-CRF 
U-Net 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
KITTI, NYU V2 
A framework that use attention-based fusion for multi-scale 
feature maps. 
Fusing multi-scale context information using information 
exchang network. 
Recurrent network with gated recurrent units and ConvL- 
STM for integrating temporal information. 
Improved depth estimation with concurrent learning using 
supervised, unsupervised and weakly supervised techniques. 
Self attention and discrete disparity volume for monocular 
depth. 
GAN for single image depth. 
Rectangle convolution capturing global dependencies to pre- 
serve details in depth map. 
GAN network to elimanate occlusion using masking. 
Real to synthetic domain adaptation with domain declutter- 
ing. 
Online learning based depth estimation with an adapter to 
handle domain shift problem. 
Depth and visual odometry learning in self-supervised set- 
ting using stereo image pairs. 
To output a task agnostic probability distribution for single 
image depth. 
Joint self-supervision for depth, optical flow and pose. 
Depth aggregation guided through semenatic segmentation. 
A left-right consistency based loss term for semi supervision. 
Utilising 3D geometry structure and semantics. 
Integrating both semantic and geometric information for 
self-supervision. 
Novel appearance matching loss, auto masking technique 
for multi-scale monocular supervision. 
Leveraging large scales of synthetic images with GAN based 
translation. 
Depth completion network using sparcity invariant opera- 
tions. 
Masking input to understand how CNNS learn to monocular 
estimate depth. 
Filter pruning with binary masks to obtain light-weight CNN 
models for monocular depth estimation. 
Enabling two networks to estimate left and right disparities 
for self-supervision. 
Learning to estimate disparity maps using a CRF coupled 
dual GAN network. 
Contextual convolution neural network with CRF model for 
scene aware depth estimation. 
Replacing camera pose estimation for self superivision using 
SLAM algorithm. 
Edge and occlusion aware depth estimation with attention 
based loss. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
AED; 3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
SV. 
TMV; RMI; OL; CL. 
SV. 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
WS. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
WS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; CG; 
3DS; MV. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TSI; RMI; VG; SLS; 
TMI; 
RMI; 
FCN; 3DS; DT; 
(MV,Synthetic) 
TMV; FCN; OL; FT; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
TMI; RMI; 3DS; 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SMS; 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
OL; 
TSV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TMI; RMI; CG; 
3DS; 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
WS; 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TSI; RMI; GC; SLS; 
TMI; RMI; CC; 
3DS; 
TSI; RMI; SLS; FT; 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
AED; 3DS; 
[148] 
2020 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
NYU V2, KITTI 
[103] 
2020 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
3D 
KITTI 
[128] 
2020 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Joint 
3D, 
self, 
[65] 
2020 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y 
weakly 
Self 
KITTI 
[66] 
2020 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
RGBD 
[196] 
[203] 
2020 
2020 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
Self 
Self 
KITTI,  Cityscapes, 
Make3D 
KITTI, Make3D 
[206] 
2020 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
3D 
NYU V2, SUNCG 
[200] 
2020 
Y 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
KITTI, Cityscapes 
[194] 
2020 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
KITTI, NYU V2 
[168] 
2020 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
NYU V2 
[159] 
2020 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
Self 
KITTI 
[160] 
2020 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
3D 
NYU V2, Cityscapes 
[3] 
2019 
N 
N 
N 
Semi 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
[20] 
2019 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
[21] 
2019 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
[44] 
2019 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
KITTI, Make3D 
[48] 
2019 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
3D 
UnityDepth, KITTI 
[57] 
2019 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Weakly 
KITTI, NYU V2 
[54] 
2019 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
NYU V2 
[37] 
2019 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
KITTI 
[129] 
2019 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
KITTI 
[122] 
2019 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
KITTI, Cityscapes 
[144] 
2019 
N 
Y 
N 
Y 
3D 
[131] 
2019 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
KITTI, Cityscapes 
[124] 
2019 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
Synthetic, NYU V2 
• 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX.

Table 2 – continued from previous page 
 
Continued on next page 
 
 
 
 
[116] 
2019 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono 
videos 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono 
video 
Mono 
video 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Stereo videos 
Mono images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Stereo images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Stereo images 
Mono videos, GT 
depth 
Stereo images 
Stereo images 
Stereo pairs 
Multiview images 
Stereo images 
Stereo image pairs 
Mono image 
Mono images 
Mono video 
Mono video 
Mono images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Stereo videos 
Mono images 
Mono images 
Stereo images 
Stereo imsges, se- 
mantic labels 
Synthetic image 
depth pairs 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
KITTI 
Sub-pixel convolution for recovering super resolution depth. 
Semi-supervised framework in adversarial learning para- 
digm. 
A network architecture that utilizes local planer guidance 
layers for decoding. 
Semi-supervised learning method based on confidence learn- 
ing. 
Enhanced self-supervision using cost volume and disparity 
refinement. 
Sub-pixel convolution for super resolution depth maps. 
Fusing multiple CNN outputs using conditional CRFs. 
Domain adapted depth estimation with geometry awareness 
using synthetic images. 
Depth estimation using both spatial and temporal correlation 
features. 
Multi-scale error loss for self-supervised learning. 
Monocular depth estimation using traditional stereo match- 
ing techniques. 
Dual attention to capturing both spatial and channel feature 
dependencies. 
Monocular depth odometry estimation with ConvLSTM 
based architecture. 
Overcoming ambiguous reprojection using monocular hints 
in self-supervised stereo learning. 
Monocular depth in GAN paradigm, reliable evaluation pro- 
tocol. 
Synthetic to real, domain adaptation via style transfer. 
Context-aware depth estimation with adversarial training. 
A network to learn spatiotemporal mapping between image 
and depth. 
Adversarial training with monocular video. 
Spacial increasing discretisation for relative depth. 
Whole strip masking based CNN convolution operations for 
monocular depth estimation. 
Self supervision using trinocular assumption. 
Novel framework with dense feature extractor and an atten- 
tion mechanism. 
Attention driven loss with a network that propagates seman- 
tic information. 
Deep variational model which integrates both global and 
local predictions. 
Using semantic label to obtain supervision signal for stereo 
based self-supervision. 
Using image translation to estimate depth from real images 
similar to synthetic images. 
Recursive learning for both depth estimation and semantic 
segmentation. 
TSV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TMI; RMI; CG; 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SMS; 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
SMS; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; 
TMI; RMI; CC; 
3DS; 
TSI; RMI; CyG; 
3DS; SV. 
TMV; RMV; VG; 
OL; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TSI; RMI; AED; 
SLS; 
TMVS; RMI; SLS; 
CL; SI. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; SV. 
TSI; RMI; VG; SLS; 
SI. 
TMI; RMI; CG; DT; 
(SV,Synthetic). 
TMI; RMI; CG; 
3DS; SV. 
TMV; RV; 3DS; CL. 
SV. 
TMV; RMV; GC; 
SMS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TSV; RMI; SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; AED; 
3DS; (SV,MI). 
TMI; RMI; AED; 
3DS; SV. 
TSI; RMI; 3DS; 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SMS; 
TMI; RMI; VG; 
3DS; DT; 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; MI. 
[63] 
[79] 
2019 
2019 
Conditional 
GAN 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Semi 
3D 
NYU V2, KITTI 
NYU V2, KITTI 
[152] 
2019 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Semi 
NYU V2, ImageNet 
[153] 
2019 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
KITTI, Cityscapes 
[205] 
2019 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
NYU V2, Make3D 
[173] 
[204] 
2019 
2019 
CNN-CRF 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
N 
3D 
3D 
KITTI,  NYU  V2, 
Make3D 
KITTI, Make3D 
[195] 
2019 
GAN 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
3D 
KITTI, NYU V2 
[191] 
2019 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
KITTI 
[153] 
2019 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
KITTI, Cityscapes 
[190] 
2019 
CNN 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
KITTI 
[162] 
2019 
ConvLSTM 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
KITTI 
[164] 
2019 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
KITTI 
[2] 
[4] 
2018 
2018 
Vanilla 
GAN 
Cycle GAN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
3D 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
[22] 
[31] 
2018 
2018 
Conditional 
GAN 
ConvLSTM 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
3D 
NYU V2, KITTI 
KITTI 
[32] 
2018 
GAN-CRF 
N 
N 
N 
Semi 
KITTI 
[38] 
2018 
CNN 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
NYU V2, KITTI 
[53] 
[120] 
2018 
2018 
CNN- 
WSM 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
Self 
NYU V2 
KITTI 
[50] 
[64] 
2018 
2018 
FCN 
CNN 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y 
Y 
3D 
3D 
B3DO, NYU V2, SUN- 
RGBD 
NYU V2, KITTI 
[70] 
2018 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
KITTI, NYU V2, DIML 
[193] 
2018 
CNN 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
Semi 
KITTI 
[207] 
2018 
GAN 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
3D 
KITTI, SUNCG 
[199] 
2018 
CNN 
Y 
Y 
N 
Y 
3D 
NYU V2, Sun RGBD 
 
Ref. 
Year Runtime Training input 
input 
Archit. 
Atten.
Segme. Adapta. Multi- Superv. Datasets 
Scale 
Key Contribution 
Classification 
based on the 
taxonomy 
Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos 
• 5 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX.

6 
Rajapaksha, et al. 
 
 Table 2 – continued from previous page 
 
Ref. 
Year 
Runtime 
input 
Training input 
Archit. 
Atten. 
Segme. 
Adapta. Multi- 
Scale 
Superv. Datasets 
Key Contribution 
Classification 
based on the 
taxonomy 
 
 
[213] 
2018 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono Im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono im- 
ages 
Mono im- 
age 
Mono videos 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, ordi- 
nal depth labels 
Mono Video 
Mono 
videos, 
sparse GT depth 
Stereo image pairs 
Stereo images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth, normals 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Stereo pairs from 
3D movies 
Mono images 
Stereo image pairs 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono images, rela- 
tive depth 
Mono images, GT 
depth 
Mono videos 
Mono images, 3D 
box annotations 
Mono images 
Mono video 
Mono images 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
KITTI 
Joint learning of depth and optical flow. 
Attention-guided multi-scale feature fusion with CRFs. 
Unsupervised domain adaptation for pixel-wise regression. 
ResNet architecture and depth balanced euclidean distance 
based loss. 
Deep attention based classification network for depth esti- 
mation. 
Multi-view internet photo collection as training data using 
modern SFM and MVS. 
Discrete depth label classification. 
Generalization using synthetic data and LSTM for global 
scale estimation. 
End-to-end unsupervised approach with a loss that enforce 
left-right consistency. 
Using both supervised and unsupervised cues for depth esti- 
mation. 
Joint estimation on depth, motion, surface normals and opti- 
cal flow. 
Multi-scale feature fusion with CRFs for CNNs. 
Using stereo images from 3D movies for self-supervision. 
Depth in the wild dataset. 
Coarse to fine depth with CNN. 
Fully convolution architecture with novel up conv. blocks. 
Motion segmentation-based method to estimate depth for 
dynamic complex scenes. 
CNN and random forest-based framework for monocular 
depth estimation. 
Common multi-scale network for depth, semantic and sur- 
face normal. 
A framework using deep convolutional neural fields with 
continuous CRFs. 
Hierarchical CRFs for improving depth regression. 
Estimating ordinal depth in term of point pairs. 
A hierarchical representation by taking hints on the global 
structure of indoor scenes. 
Self-supervision using monocular videos. 
Joint learning, for instance, segmentation and depth order- 
ing. 
Scale invariant error for multi-scale depth prediction. 
a non-parametric depth transfer approach to infer temporally 
consistent depth 
depth using local gradient-based features and MRFs 
TMV; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; CC; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV; DT. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; AED; 
3DS; SV. 
MVS; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SI. 
TMV; RMI; CC; SV. 
TMV; RMI; 3DS; 
FL; SV. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SMS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; MI. 
TMI; RMI; CC; SV. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; MV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
WS; MI. 
TSI; RMI; FCN; 
SLS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; 3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; CC; 
3DS; MV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
SV. 
TMI; RMI; CC; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; HCRF; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; MI. 
TMI; RMI; 3DS; SV. 
TMV; FCN; SLS; 
SV. 
TMI; RMI; CC; 
3DS; SV. 
TMI; RMI; FCN; 
3DS; SV. 
TMV; RMI; 3DS; 
SV. 
TMI; RMI; MRF; 
3DS; MV. 
[174] 
2018 
CNN-CRF 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
KITTI 
[74] 
2018 
ResNet 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
Self 
NYU V2, KITTI 
[80] 
2018 
ResNet 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
NYU V2 
[84] 
[85] 
2018 
2018 
CNN 
U-Net 
ResNet 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
Y 
3D 
3D 
NYU V2, ScanNet 
Megadepth 
[19] 
2017 
CNN-CRF 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
NYU V2, KITTI 
[102] 
[43] 
2017 
2017 
RNN- 
LSTM 
FCN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
Self 
KITTI 
Cityscapes, KITTI 
[76] 
2017 
ResNet 
N 
N 
Y 
N 
Semi 
KITTI 
[154] 
2017 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
SUN3D, RGBD-SLAM 
[172] 
2017 
CNN-CRF 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
NYU V2 
[171] 
2016 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
Deep3D 
[24] 
2016 
CNN 
N 
Y 
Y 
Weakly 
DIW, RGBD 
[39] 
2016 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Self 
KITTI 
[78] 
2016 
FCN 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
NYU V2, make3d 
[127] 
2016 
_ 
N 
Y 
N 
N 
3D 
Sintel, KITTI 
[132] 
2016 
CNN-RF 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
Make3D, NYU V2 
[35] 
2015 
CNN 
N 
Y 
Y 
3D 
NYU V2,RGBD 
[91] 
2015 
CNN-CRF 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
NYU V2, make3d 
[83] 
2015 
CNN-CRF 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
3D 
NYU V2, make3d 
[212] 
[211] 
2015 
2015 
CNN 
CRF 
N 
N 
Y 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Weakly 
3D 
Intrinsic images in the 
Wild 
NYU V2, RMRC 
[208] 
2015 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
Y 
Self 
KITTI 
[201] 
2015 
CNN-MRF 
N 
Y 
N 
Y 
3D 
KITTI 
[36] 
2014 
CNN 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
NYU V2, KITTI 
[67] 
2014 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
Make3D, NYUD 
[73] 
2012 
MRF 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3D 
Google earth 
• 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX.

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  7 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
D SUMMARY OF EXISTING SURVEYS 
 
Table 3. Summary of existing survey articles on depth estimation using monocular images and videos. NA: Reviewed Network 
Architectures, SM: Reviewed Supervision Modes. 
 
 
covered 
 
al. [14] 
Zhao et 
al. [202] 
Xiaogang 
et al. [170] 
2019 
2020  2014- 
2019 
2020  2015- 
2020 
ences of 5 approaches 
An overview of the depth estima- 
tion based on deep learning 
An overview on deep learning 
based approaches 
 
110+ 
N 
Y 
Based on supervision 
only 
45 
N 
Y 
None 
Swaraja et 
al. [150] 
2021  2012- 
2021 
Focus on training methodologies 
35 
Y 
N 
Based on architecture 
only 
Ji et 
al. [62] 
Ming et 
al. [107] 
2021  2012- 
2020 
2021  2014- 
2020 
Experimenting on different CNN 
architectures towards good prac- 
tices 
Summary of deep learning ap- 
proaches 
40+ 
Y 
N 
None 
 
190+ 
Y 
Y 
Only based on 6 years 
of work and training 
supervision only 
Vyas et 
al. [156] 
2022  - 
Gaps in outdoor depth estimation 
60+ 
Y 
Y 
Network architecture 
and supervision only 
Bae et 
al. [6] 
2023  - 
a study on the generality of the 
network architectures. 
- 
Y 
N 
CNN and ViT net- 
works only 
Ours 
2024  2012- 
2024 
Critically reviewing most recent 
literature based on the pipeline, ar- 
chitectures and datasets, covering 
a broad taxonomy 
160+  Y  Y  Based on input modal- 
ity, architectures and 
training (supervision, 
datasets) 
 
 
 
E LIMITATIONS OF EXISTING SURVEYS 
We provide a brief summary of existing surveys on monocular depth estimation and their limitations. Bhoi 
et al. [14] present a survey on only five methods: four supervised and one unsupervised. It compares the 
similarities and differences between those methods. However, only considering a few papers does not provide 
broad knowledge on the topic. Xiaogang et al. [170] also present a survey highlighting only two supervision 
modes: supervised and self-supervised. Similarly, Swaraja et al. [150] present a study with 35 papers. Given the 
number of new papers published in the last few years, their survey only covers a limited scope. Meanwhile, Zhao 
et al. [202] present a survey with papers published up to 2020. The survey discusses datasets and evaluation 
metrics for monocular depth estimation. However, their taxonomy is limited to supervision modes used for 
training. 
Ji et al. [62] review Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based monocular depth estimation techniques. They 
highlight the good practices for using CNN models. Their survey includes an experimental evaluation of the 
effects of different combinations of CNN encoder-decoder networks, training losses, and input data conditions 
Survey 
Year Time 
range 
Main focus 
Papers 
NA. SM. Taxonomy 
Bhoi et 
2019 2018- 
Comparing similarities and differ- 
5 
Y 
Y 
Only on supervision

8  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
such as resolution and training sample size. The major limitation is that their review only focuses on CNN- 
based encoder-decoder models with a limited number of papers. They did not cover the growing interest in 
hybrid architectures such as CNN-Long-Short-Term Memory (CNN-LSTM), CNN-Conditional Random Fields 
(CNN-CRFs), and Generative Adversarial Network-CRF (GAN-CRF). Ming et al. [107] present a survey of deep 
learning-based monocular depth estimation methods between 2014 and 2020. Their work summarises deep 
learning models, methods, datasets, evaluation metrics, and future trends. They have proposed a taxonomy based 
on training supervision and tasks (single and multi-task). However, they only covered CNN, RNN, and GAN-based 
architectures, which were popular then. 
In their survey, Vyas et al. [156] focus on methods for outdoor depth estimation. Their work did not consider 
monocular depth estimation in indoor environments such as living rooms, office rooms, and industrial halls. The 
study was limited to about 60 papers in the literature. The survey does not include an explicit taxonomy and 
compares only the CNN and RNN-based methods and datasets specific to the outdoor domain. Several existing 
work [6, 9] study on neural network architectures for monocular depth estimation and their ability to generalize 
to unseen data. However, they mainly focus on CNN and transformer-based structures only. 
F SHORT DESCRIPTIONS OF COMMON DATASETS 
F.1 
Datasets with real scenes 
Outdoor datasets which are commonly used for autonomous driving applications are described below. 
KITTI [105]: Contains complex scenes captured from outdoor rural and urban regions during day time. Stereo 
image pairs of resolution 1242 × 376, which contain up to 15 to 30 objects (pedestrians and vehicles) along with 
depth captured using LiDAR sensors, are available. They have calibrated cameras, a localization system, and 
a laser scanner to be synchronized to provide accurate ground-truth. KITTI has been used in many works as 
the benchmark dataset. It is mostly suitable for autonomous driving-related tasks. However, non-Lambertian 
surfaces such as reflecting and transparent surfaces, objects with large displacements due to speed, and sunny or 
cloudy lighting conditions are likely to have produced erroneous data. KITTI training set contains 61 scenes with 
3712 training samples. 
Cityscapes [30]: This is a large scale dataset covering urban. It includes outdoor scenes from 50 different cities 
and it is most suitable for semantic reasoning and segmentation-based depth estimation research for 3D scene 
understanding. The dataset includes both pixel-level annotation data and coarse annotations separately. The 
average human and vehicle density captured is higher compared to KITTI 2015. 
NYU V2 Depth [141]: To develop a good dataset for the segmentation task NYU depth has been proposed. NYU 
V2 contains 1449 pairs of aligned image depth pairs, which cover RGB-D data of 646 diverse indoor scenes. Being 
designed for segmentation purposes, it has both ground-truth depth data and semantic labels. This is a useful 
in-depth estimation performed with respect to semantic segmentation. The presence of regions with small objects, 
fine details, and heavy occlusions in scenes can badly impact the accuracy of the ground-truth. 
EuRoC [17]: This dataset is specifically designed for evaluating visual-inertial localization and 3D Reconstruction 
of industrial environments. The dataset accommodates 11 sets of stereo images captured from an aerial viewing 
device. Different conditions have been considered in coming up with a complete aerial view dataset, such as slow 
flights, dynamic flights, motion blur, and illumination. A distinct feature is the availability of both motion and 3D 
ground-truth for the airborne platform. The dataset includes raw data, spatio-temporally aligned ground-truth, 
and extrinsic and intrinsic camera parameters. 
In addition, the most commonly used datasets with indoor scenes are: 
SUN3D [169]: This dataset has been initially designed for place enteric scene understanding. It contains RGB-D 
data captured across indoor environments, covering full apartments. Data include RGB-D images of 640 × 480 
resolution, together with segmentation labels, camera poses, and point clouds. While NYU V2 only covers part of

Deep Learning-based Depth Estimation Methods from Monocular Image and Videos  •  9 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
a room, SUN3D provides depth and labels for the whole room or multiple rooms. This medium-scale dataset has 
425 video sequences from 254 scenes inside 41 buildings. It is most appropriate for human-like interpretation 
tasks for indoor scenes. 
RGBD SLAM [146]: This has been used as a benchmark dataset for evaluating visual SLAM and odometry 
systems. The dataset includes image sequences of an office environment and industrial hall with 39 image 
sequences with a resolution of 640 × 480 in two indoor settings. Dataset is good for indoor scene understanding. 
However, not much attention was given to capturing data under varying illumination conditions and at different 
times of the day. 
F.2 
Synthetic datasets 
We also highlight three synthetic datasets which contributed to breakthroughs in the field of monocular depth 
estimation. 
Scenes11: A synthetic dataset which consists of virtual scenes and random geometry with motions. Being 
a synthetic dataset it has a more accurate ground-truth and poses. The disadvantage is the lack of realistic 
features [154]. 
Blendswap: A dataset developed based on blender-powered 3D objects and scenes. This covers 150 scenes from 
Blendsawp.com. This is comparably very small but brings a variety of indoor data ranging from cartoon-like to 
more real-like scenes [154]. 
Sintel [18]: An optical flow dataset on synthetic data, which includes data with long sequences of images, large 
motions, reflections, motion blur, defocus blur, and atmospheric effects. This was initially implemented for 
research on optical flow evaluation. Information extracted from Sintel, a 3D animated movie, was used to render 
under different rendering settings and to emulate different conditions closer to real data. 
Although synthetic datasets do not always match with the laws of physics, and the light interactions, shape, and 
shading are not realistic, these are often used as a baseline for comparing the performance of novel methods with 
the existing ones. 
G SUMMARY OF EVALUATION METRICS 
Received XX XX 2024; revised XX XXX 2024; accepted XX XXX 2024

10  •  Rajapaksha, et al. 
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: June XXXX. 
 
 
𝑖 
𝑖 
𝑖 
𝑑 
𝑑 
Table 4. Evaluation metrics used in deep learning-based methods. 𝑁 is the total number of pixels of test images with depth 
values, 𝑑∗ and 𝑑𝑖 are the ground-truth depth and estimated depth at pixel 𝑖 and, 𝑡 is the threshold. 
 
Metric 
Metric Type 
Function 
Interpretation 
Relative 
Accu- 
Depth accu- 𝑚𝑎𝑥 (, 𝑑𝑖  , 𝑑∗ 
) = 𝛿 < 𝑡 
𝛿 is % of 𝑑 
and t 𝜖 (1.25, 1.252, 
racy 
Threshold 
racy 
𝑑∗ 𝑑𝑖 
1 
3 
𝑖 
 
(𝛿 <threshold(t)) 
𝑖 
.25 ).Higher is better. 
Linear 
Root 
Mean 
Depth error 
√︃ 
 1  L,
𝑖𝜖𝑁 ||𝑑𝑖 − 𝑑∗ ||2 
Root value of the average squared er- 
Squared Error (RMSE) 
|𝑁 | 
𝑖 
ror. Lower is better. 
Log Root Mean Squared 
Depth error 
√︃ 
 1  L,
𝑖𝜖𝑁 ||𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑑𝑖 ) − 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑑∗) ||2 
Root value of the average squared log 
Error (RMSE Log) 
Absolute Relative Error 
|𝑁 | 
Depth error 
 1  L, 
 
|𝑑𝑖 −𝑑∗ | 
𝑖 
error. Lower is better. 
Reducing the effect of large errors in 
(Abs. Rel) 
|𝑁 | 
𝑖𝜖𝑁 
∗ 
𝑖 
 
 
 
 
 
∗ 2 
the distance, where the image resolu- 
tion is lower and higher magnitude 
of the error is more likely to occur. 
Lower is better. 
Squared Relative Error 
Depth error 
 1  L, 
| |𝑑𝑖 −𝑑𝑖 | | 
Lower is better. 
(Sq. Rel) 
|𝑁 | 
𝑖𝜖𝑁 
∗ 
𝑖 
Mean Log Error (log10) 
Depth error 
 1  L,
𝑖𝜖𝑁 ||𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑑𝑖 ) − 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑑∗) || 
Mean of depth error in log. Lower is 
|𝑁 | 
better. 
 
 
𝑖